[View](https://plant-humanities.app/essay?gdid=1pXMxmniJsPZc0bC-5PX5wygn22qRMjRs)

<var data-essay
	title="Heliconias"
	data-banner="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Illustration_from_Les_liliac%C3%A9es_by_Pierre_Joseph_Redout%C3%A9_(1759-1840)._Digitally_enhanced_by_rawpixel-com_381.jpg"
	data-layout="vtl"
	data-num-maps="13"
	data-num-images="11"
	data-num-specimens="0"
	data-num-primary-sources="6"
	data-author="Yota Batsaki, PhD"></var>

### Need Subtitle
Heliconias, with their sculptural bracts and stunning colors, are an iconic tropical plant, widely distributed in ornamental gardens and the horticulture trade. Yet until fairly recently these plants were poorly known to scientists. Heliconias are large herbs with fleshy, bulky inflorescences and flowers, so botanists have not always collected them in the field and their character is hard to capture on a herbarium sheet. However, in recent decades,  both field observations and controlled experiments by botanists have led to fascinating discoveries about heliconias  that illuminate the sophistication of plant-animal interactions, expand our understanding of evolution, and invite us to reconsider the astonishing capacity of plants to act on their environments.
<param ve-plant-specimen eid="Q624242">

The genus Heliconia was named by Linnaeus after mount Helicon, the home of Apollo and the Muses,  to emphasize the close taxonomic relationship to the genus Musa, or the bananas. Overall, taxonomists recognize about 185 species of Heliconia world-wide, but there are undoubtedly one or two dozen more species to discover and describe in the tropical forests of the two distinct regions across the globe where they grow as native plants. These respective habitats, as wide apart as tropical South America and the islands of the South Pacific, determine the appearance of the plants.
<param ve-image 
       fit="cover"
       title="The eight families of the order Zingiberales showing the relationship of bananas (Musaceae) and heliconias (Heliconiaceae)."
       url="https://static.wixstatic.com/media/ef1aa2_46e5a2b723c64b20a704f71e8ef726e6.jpg/v1/fill/w_767,h_632,al_c,lg_1,q_85/ef1aa2_46e5a2b723c64b20a704f71e8ef726e6.webp"

In tropical America, heliconias are diurnal and  brightly colored because they are pollinated by hummingbirds that can detect reds, oranges, pinks, and yellows. [In the South Pacific](https://www-jstor-org.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/stable/23188167), the species flower at night and have inflorescences and colors that are generally dull green in color and because they are pollinated by color-blind bats that forage at night.
<param ve-map basemap="Esri_WorldPhysical" center="7.498854, 21.527758" zoom="2">
<param ve-map-layer geojson active url="geojson/heliconia_distribution.json">

The striking structure, color, and beauty of heliconias lend themselves better to the painter’s brush than the herbarium sheet. In fact, a work of botanical art led to the discovery of a new variety. The renowned botanical artist [Margaret Mee](https://www.doaks.org/resources/online-exhibits/margaret-mee-portraits-of-plants/margaret-mee-in-the-amazon)  undertook  15 expeditions  into the Amazon in the course of which she painted several heliconias. One of them, published in Mee’sFlowers of the AmazonForests,  caught the attention of Smithsonian botanist John Kress.

[Figure 3: Mee, Heliconia chartacea var. meeana]

After spending several years in South America searching for new species of Heliconia, in 1990 Kress was back in his office at the Smithsonian, leafing through Mee’s botanical paintings, when he  came across a  form of heliconia, recorded by Mee  near the border between Venezuela and Brazil,that was unknown to him. The flowers’ unusual greenish-yellow color differed from those commonly found in that region. Kress realized that it was a new variety, maybe even a new species, and resolved to find it and name it after Mee.

[SHORT VIDEO with John telling the story of the discovery] Video script: “Several years later, when I was in Venezuela collecting plants, I decided to find this Heliconia so I organized an expedition up the Orinoco River to where it meets the Vaupés River. With two other botanists (one from Venezuela named Ernesto Foldatsand the other a student from Germany) along with my research assistant Cheryl Roesel, I flew down to a missionary group working with the Yanomamo indigenous people where we knew there was a little air strip near Platanal along the Orinoco. Once we landed and paid our respect to our hosts in the region, I headed into the forest along the river. It took me about five minutes to find the new Heliconia! You can tell how excited we were from the photograph. We made some botanical specimens for the local herbarium in Venezuela and the Smithsonian. I took copious notes and measurements. Later I decided that the plant was not a unique species so I named it as a variety and called it Heliconiachartaceavar.meeana. We flew back that afternoon after a brief celebration. It was a one-day expedition and finding the plant was not that difficult. The return was another story. We had to fly out on a tiny little plane while it was still light. After takeoff I was sitting next to the pilot when the engine stopped while we were high over the rain forest. I thought: “Hey, I have finally found Margaret Mee’sHeliconiaand the engine has stopped. What is happening?” Then the pilot looked over at me and commented “Oh, I forgot to switch the gas tanks.” He flipped the switch and we continued on our way.”

[Figure 4: photograph of discovery of Heliconia  chartacea var. Meeana]

This special form, which was named by Kress Heliconia  chartacea  var. meeana,  is greenish-yellow in color and differs from the more typical form of Heliconia  chartacea, which is bright pink and rose. It may simply be a partial albino form of the typical species and is also pollinated by hummingbirds. A scientific illustration by Smithsonian botanical artist [Alice Tangerini](https://www.doaks.org/resources/online-exhibits/margaret-mee-portraits-of-plants/essays-interviews-resources/tangerini-interview), created after Kress returned with the heliconia, employed a mix of photographs, dried specimens, and dissections under the microscope to capture the plant’s structures in pen and ink for the botanical publication of the new variety.

[Figure 5: Alice Tangerini, Heliconia  chartacea  var. meeana]

The more typical form of Heliconia  chartacea  is called “Sexy Pink” in the horticultural trade for its attractive inflorescences and flowers. Heliconias have been an object of desire for gardeners outside their natural habitat for centuries. Several species of Heliconia, including H. psittacorum, H. bihai, and H. metallica, have been cultivated as ornamentals since the 1700s. They were carried around the world by horticulturalists and found in many botanical gardens from Europe to Asia to the Pacific.

[Figure 6: Margaret Mee, Heliconia  psittacorum]

The Botanical Magazine (1799-1800) published a plate ([#502](https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/469087#page/160/mode/1up)) and an entry on Heliconia  psittacorum: “This beautiful stove plant is a native of Jamaica…” The text alludes to the fact that the image was drawn from a living specimen and marks the stage of the plant at that particular moment: “At a more advanced stage than that at which our drawing was taken, the top of the stem becomes flexuous or zig-zag,” alluding to the plant’s  trademark  bracts. The “stove plant” designation is a reminder that growing heliconias would have required expensive heating and hothouse infrastructure available only to the very wealthy; the flowering of a “stove plant” was often a competitive feat worthy of being recorded and a source of prestige for its own  owner. This drawing “was made from a plant which flowered in August 1800, amidst a great variety of beautiful and rare exotics, in the superb collection of E.D. Woodford, Esq., at Vauxhall.” Collectors basked in the achievement and glamor that came with the ability to coax such a rare exotic into bloom.

[Figure 7: Curtis’ Botanical Magazine, Heliconia  psittacorum]

Heliconias are of particular interest to science and to our understanding of ecosystems and plant-animal interactions because they have evolved highly specialized relationships with their pollinators, the hummingbirds. Heliconias are mostly found in the neotropics from central Mexico down to northern Argentina, including the Caribbean. They all have brightly colored flowers and bracts that open during the day to attract their hummingbird pollinators. Another strange group ofheliconiasin the South Pacific is found from Samoa to New Guinea and they are completely different: they are a dull, green color and flower at night. They are pollinated by bats, which cannot detect color and forage after dark, so the Pacific heliconias have lost their bright colors. We now believe that the most ancient heliconias that lived in South America about ten million years ago, and had bright red and yellow flowers, somehow got to the South Pacific islands where they lost their bright colors and switched from hummingbird pollination to bat pollination.

This is evolution at work. Indeed, the close relationships between some plants and animals and their interactions played a key role in the development of Charles Darwin’s ideas on the process of natural selection and evolution. Darwin was especially interested in the relationship between orchids and the insects that pollinated them. Heliconias offer equally interesting and unique relationships with their animal pollinators.

[Figure 8: Title page of Darwin, On the Various Contrivances]

An extraordinary [example](https://link-springer-com.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/content/pdf/10.1007/s00442-011-2043-8.pdf) of coevolution, or reciprocal evolution between two species, is the relationship between heliconias and hummingbirds in the eastern arc of the Caribbean islands. The two species of heliconias native to these islands and the one species of hummingbird found there have coevolved in a very unique and interesting way. The two heliconias are quite different from each other, but the single species of hummingbird that  pollinates them is so specialized that the small-bodied females visit one species of heliconia and the larger-bodied males visit the other species.  Astonishingly, the shape and size of the bills of each sex corresponds to the shape and size of the flowers of the specific heliconias that they visit and feed from.  In other words, one sex of the hummingbird has evolved with one species of heliconia and the other sex has evolved with the second species of plant.

[Figure 9: Bryan Poole, Heliconiabihaiwith female hummingbirds] 

Archipelagoes are ideal environments for observing plant evolution driven by interactions with animals of various kinds. Darwin’s ideas on evolution and natural selection were in part based on his experiences and observations in the Galápagos Islands and other archipelagos. The fewer species of plants and animals on islands than in mainland habitats allow biologists to study more closely ecological and evolutionary processes in natural communities. This is certainly true with the heliconias and hummingbirds in the arc of islands in the Eastern Caribbean. Douglas Altshuler and Christopher James Clark [describe](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3834345) the dynamic nature of these interactions: “Hummingbird and Heliconia engage in a coevolutionary dance, with flower shape evolving in response to hummingbird bills, and bill shape evolving in response to flower shape. By offering nectars containing different amounts of energy, Heliconia species select for different body sizes” in the birds as well. Echoing  the famous “Darwin’s Finches” in the Galapagos,  Altshuler and Clark referred to the birds in the Caribbean as “Darwin’s Hummingbirds.”

[Figure 10: Bryan Poole, Heliconiacaribeae with male hummingbirds]

Another species, Heliconia  tortuosa from Costa Rica, provides a fascinating example of plant adaption in selecting specific pollinators. The distinctive shape of the plant’s flowers acts as a screening mechanism. An ingenious aviary [experiment](https://www-jstor-org.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/stable/26462059) has shown that the plant has the capacity to distinguish among pollinators and respond to their visits by preventing or facilitating pollen tube growth to encourage or discourage fertilization and seed production. Specifically, Heliconia  tortuosa plants allow pollen tube growth after visits by two species of hummingbird that are more likely to carry high-quality, long-distance and more diverse pollen--and prevent pollen tube growth after visits by less effective species of hummingbirds. The plants apparently discriminate by measuring how much nectar has been removed by the particular birds. This experiment is perhaps the first evidence of specific pollinator recognition by plants, and a form of decision-making that identifies the desired pollinator to optimize reproduction.

Plants do not exist in isolation as they are often depicted in the portraits painted by artists and the drawings of botanical illustrators. Rather, plants inhabit rich and diverse habitats populated by many plants, numerous birds, other animals, and microorganisms. Today, many of the highly specialized interactions among these creatures are severely under threat of extinction. 

A full assessment of the conservation status of each known species of Heliconia is currently being conducted by John Kress, Gary Krupnick, and Serenity Montano. Using information from specimens collected over the last two hundred years and maintained in herbaria around the world, such as the United States National Herbarium at the Smithsonian Institution, they are using both the IUCN Red List Criteria method of assessment and a second rapid assessment method to determine conservation status of each species. Geospatial Conservation Assessment (GeoCat) maps and Red List descriptions of the conservation status of 185 species are being produced. For example, data from over 200 herbarium specimens found in 20 institutions suggest that Heliconia bihai from the Caribbean and northern South America is of “Least Concern” for conservation (see GeoCat map and Red List assessment). Whereas the six available specimens of the very closely related species Heliconia  aurea from Colombia and Venezuela indicate that it is “Vulnerable” and at risk of extinction most likely due to habitat alteration, degradation, and destruction (see GeoCat map and Red List assessment).
