<p><a href="https://us-central1-visual-essay.cloudfunctions.net/essay?gdid=1-q4xsJuLtqYotSbVRPJ2NPZvs_JKiF8x">View</a></p>
<p><var title="The ubiquity of mint: exploring plant mythology, naming and commercial value"></var><br>
<var title="World"></var><br>
<var title="Samuel Dale" id="Q1538175"></var></p>
<h2 id="the-ubiquity-of-mint-exploring-plant-mythology-naming-and-commercial-value">The ubiquity of mint: exploring plant mythology, naming and commercial value</h2>
<h3 id="victoria-pickering">Victoria Pickering</h3>
<!--Insert image viewer showing images of different sorts of mint, spearmint/peppermint/wild mint etc &lt;var data-image-viewer&gt;&lt;/var&gt;&#10;&lt;var data-image id=&#34;&#34; title=&#34;&#34; data-url=&#34;.jpg&#34; data-region=&#34;455,168,847,867&#34;&gt;&lt;/var&gt;-->
<p>Some scents regularly appear in our daily lives and give us a sense of familiarity. Mint is one such example of a ubiquitous plant, and one that we think we know. The strong scent and taste of mint, the notable green leaves with serrated edges, and the broad consumer uses of this plant that are so common to us today (such as toothpaste and chewing gum), obscures the lesser known fact that mint has a more nuanced history of naming and identification. Mint, known as the genus <a href="www.plantsoftheworldonline.org/taxon/urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:30016176-2"><em>Mentha</em></a>, is part of the <a href="www.plantsoftheworldonline.org/taxon/urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:30000097-2"><em>Lamiaceae</em></a> family. It is an aromatic and perennial herb and species include bergamot mint, spearmint, pennyroyal and peppermint. These species can be found distributed across parts of Africa, Asia, Europe, Australia, and North America, happily growing in wet and damp environments. With its ability to naturally hybridize, there are a wide variety of plants within the mint family. To consider how the generic mint plant has become so familiar in our everyday lives, we begin here with an account of ancient Greek mythology and then a look at the history of naming and identification of mint. The example of peppermint is then used to consider a plant’s ability to succeed as a commercial crop in America.<br>
<var title="World"></var><br>
<var title="Global"></var><br>
<var title="Global"></var></p>
<h3 id="mythology">Mythology</h3>
<!-- image viewer: ancient greek?-->
<p>Mint and common hybrid species such as peppermint have long been held in high esteem. Biblical reference to mint in the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gospel_of_Matthew">Book of Matthew</a> suggests that it was a plant considered of high value to be used as ‘tithes by the Pharisees along with anise and cumin’ (Matthew xxiii, 23). Reaching back further to ancient Greece, where plants were entwined with mythology, Minthe was the Naiad-nymph daughter of the underworld river <var id="Q939218">Cocytus</var> and loved by the god <var id="Q41410">Hades</var>. When Hades’ wife, <var id="Q45967">Persephone</var>, discovered the affair, she was propelled to transform Minthe in to the plant of her name:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Near Pylos, towards the east, is a mountain named after Minthe, who, according to myth, became the concubine of Hades, was trampled under foot by Kore (Core) [Persephone], and was transformed into garden-mint, the plant which some call <em>hedyosmos</em>. Furthermore, near the mountain is a precinct sacred to Haides.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn1" id="fnref1">1</a></sup></p>
</blockquote>
<p>Others consider Minthe to have been changed into dust first by Persephone, from which Hades caused the mint plant to grow forth, masking the smell of the dead and ensuring she was never forgotten. In fact, mint was used in funerary rites in <var id="Q11772">Ancient Greece</var>, not just for the sweet smell but to form part of the fermented drink <var id="Q908041">Kykeon</var> which was believed to offer hope in the afterlife.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn2" id="fnref2">2</a></sup> Mint was also used in many other ways including to scent the body. The English botanist <var id="Q1333338">John Gerard (1654-1612)</var>, writes about what the Ancients believed in his <a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/51905442"><em>Generall historie of plantes</em></a> (published in 1633): the Greek physician <var id="Q8778">Galen</var> taught that it ‘stoppeth the casting up of bloody, being given with water and vinegar’ and <var id="Q82778">Pliny</var> taught that when applied to the temples (in the form of a broth), mint could ‘take away the headache’, while <var id="Q297776">Dioscorides</var> speculated that it was possible for mint to <a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/51906063">prevent women from becoming pregnant</a>. Mint’s reputation for being used in a variety of ways, especially therapeutically, would be found in published material for centuries.</p>
<h3 id="‘diverse-kyndes-of-myntes-growing’">‘diverse kyndes of myntes growing’</h3>
<p>The English gardener, Jon Gardener (fl. 1400s) writes of ‘<a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/56578103">myntys</a>’ in ‘The Feate of Gardening’, one of the earliest accounts of instructions for sowing and planting and which listed over 100 plants.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn3" id="fnref3">3</a></sup> While the naturalist <var id="Q2141696">William Turner (1509-1568)]</var><sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn4" id="fnref4">4</a></sup>, has a section dedicated to ‘Mint’ in <a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/56878191"><em>A new herbal</em></a> published in 1568 in which he talks not only of the difficulty of identifying the ‘diverse kyndes of myntes growing’, he also writes of its ‘warming, bynding’ nature and ability to ‘stop blood’, ‘killeth round wormes in the belly’ and ‘a singular pleasantness in sa[u]ces.’ While <em>Mentha</em> is considered to be the common garden mint, Turner separates these from <em>Menstratum</em>, a Latin term for wild mints which we find across botanical literature.</p>
<p>Today, the common scent and flavor we associate with mint is synonymous with culinary flavor and cleanliness value but in earlier centuries, mint was valued for a much broader set of therapeutic properties. In fact, the English astrologer and apothecary <var id=" Q1334667">Nicholas Culpepper (1616–1654)</var>] believed that the <a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/36702439">mint plant could be used to treat</a> over forty different ailments. This history of diverse uses is seen in combination with a history of troublesome plant identification through centuries of botanical literature. <var id="# Q6165948">Herbals</var> in the seventeenth century identify this pattern particularly well. As <var id="Q256288">John Parkinson</var> wrote in 1640 in his <a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/56599957"><em>Theatrum Botanicum, or a Theatre of Plants</em></a> (London), ‘<a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/56599909">there are many sorts of Mints</a>’. Parkinson went on to list twelve different sorts including the ‘Crosse Mint’, which had ‘purplish colour flowers’, the ‘great Curld Mint of Germany’ and ‘Clusius his knobbed Wilde Mint’, which apparently had an ‘<a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/56599907">unpleasant smell</a>’. Similarly, the ‘Small round leafed wild Mint’ was considered to have a ‘rather strong and heady’ scent, which was ‘<a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/56599906">not very pleasant</a>’. Likewise, John Gerard wrote in his Generall historie of plantes (1633), that mint was ‘a marvellous wholesome for the stomach’ and that it had a ‘<a href="https://archive.org/details/mobot31753000817749/page/552">smelle rejoyceth the heart of man</a>’.</p>
<p><var></var><br>
<var id="bhl-56599909" title="Parkinson, p.31"></var><br>
<var id="bhl-51906062" title="Gerard, p.680"></var><br>
<var id="bhl-56599908" title="Parkinson, p. 32"></var></p>
<p><var title="World"></var><br>
<var title="British" id="Q84"></var><br>
<var title="Britain"></var></p>
<p>In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, <em>Mentha</em> engaged the attention of numerous well-known British botanists including <var id="Q316949">John Ray (1627-1705)</var>, <var id="Q3774295">Adam Buddle (1662–1715)</var>, <a href="https://plants.jstor.org/stable/10.5555/al.ap.person.bm000150941">Samuel Dale (1659-1739)</a> and Jacob Bobart. They could be found collecting a variety of mint species across Britain and exchanged their findings via written correspondence. They were intrigued by the properties and characteristics of the specimens, as well as ‘conjectures about the synonyms of authors’.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn5" id="fnref5">5</a></sup> Indeed, in Transactions of the <a href="www.linnean.org">Linnaean Society</a>, the botanist and naturalist <var id="Q458004">James Edward Smith (1759 – 17 March 1828)</var> stated that ‘<a href="https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1096-3642.1800.tb00591.x">no British genus of plants</a>, except perhaps Conserva, has been hitherto less understood than that of  <em>Mentha</em>; either with respect to its species, and the principles upon which their distinctions ought to be founded, or the synonyms of those species in the most recent, as well as the more ancient writers’.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn6" id="fnref6">6</a></sup></p>
<p>The taxonomy of the genus <em>Mentha</em> has, in the words of Lawrence, ‘been in a state of flux, with more than 3000 names published since 1753’.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn7" id="fnref7">7</a></sup> In fact, the last comprehensive classification of the genus  <em>Mentha</em> was, according to Lawrence, published over a century ago in 1896.  <em>Mentha</em> is a member of the <em>Lamiaceae</em> (formerly <em>Labiatea</em>) family which itself includes many other families including at least 236 genera and over 7000 species. As a genus,  <em>Mentha</em> is based on a combination of many characteristics rather than one unique character ranging from the inclusion of four equal stamens and naked filaments. Around 95% of the 3000 names published for the genus  <em>Mentha</em> since 1753 (the publication year of Linnaean’s <em>Species Plantarum</em>) are synonyms or illegitimate, being known as ‘infraspecific taxa’ and this problem is due to the ease of which  <em>Mentha</em> can be hybridised.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn8" id="fnref8">8</a></sup></p>
<h3 id="peppermint-a-commercial-crop">Peppermint: a commercial crop</h3>
<p>This problematic nature of identifying and naming mint however does not appear to have prevented the plant from becoming a significant commercial crop. Mint, especially commercial mint, is not considered native to North America but <var id="Q864709">Elder William Brewster (1568–1644)</var>, a passenger on the <var id="Q187093">Mayflower</var> voyage in 1620, is known to have grown a variety of mint in his garden in Plymouth, Massachusetts not long after arriving from Europe.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn9" id="fnref9">9</a></sup> From this information, the naturalist and traveller <var id="Q6242285">John Josselyn (1608-1675)</var> postulated that the <var id="Q127834">New World</var> was introduced to mint, or ‘Labiatae’, by the pilgrims. Josselyn travelled to New England in 1638 and again in 1663, documenting his travels and the natural world he encountered in two publications. The first, <a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/24624464"><em>New England’s Rarities</em></a>, was published in London in 1671, and the second, <a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/47096615"><em>An Account of Two Voyages to New England</em></a>, in 1674.<br>
<var title="New England"></var><br>
<var title="Plymouth" id="Q326295"></var></p>
<!--&lt;var data-map-layer&#10;     title=&#34;13 colonies&#34;&#10;     data-type=&#34;mapwarper&#34;&#10;     data-mapwarper-id=&#34;45357&#34;&#10;     data-active=&#34;true&#34;&gt;&lt;/var&gt;&#10;     &lt;var data-geojson&#10;    title=&#8220;Commercialmint&#8221;&#10;    data-type=&#8220;geojson&#8221;&#10;    data-url=&#8220;https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ithaka/labs-ph-essays/master/docs/geojson/hortus.json&#8221;&#10;    data-active=&#8220;true&#8221;&gt;&lt;/var&gt;-->
<p>Despite not being native to North America, peppermint and peppermint oil in particular proves to be an important lens through which to consider the movement and commercial development of plant use in America. Peppermint (<em>Mentha piperita</em>) is a hybrid of spearmint and water mint (<em>Mentha aqautica</em>) and its oil is volatile which means that it is composed of hydrocarbon compounds called terpenes. Menthol is the major tarpene in peppermint oil.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn10" id="fnref10">10</a></sup> Peppermint oil has been used in commercial products since the eighteenth century. One of the first published mentions of peppermint is in <em>Synopsis Methodica Stirpium Britannicarum</em> in 1696 by John Ray. Ray, a prominent British naturalist entwined in botanical exchange networks across Britain and Europe in the seventeenth century, wrote that ‘<a href="https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/41339853">Spear-Mint or Heart-Mint</a>’ had been ‘found by Mr. Dale in Essex [England] by Bocking River side below the Fulling-Mill in two or three places’.</p>
<p>‘Essence of peppermint’ was regularly imported to America from London and according to research undertaken by Dan Allosso in 2017, advertisements for peppermint products in American newspapers appeared in the thousands between 1750 and 1800. In fact the <a href="https://www.americanantiquarian.org/">American Antiquarian Society</a> shows almost 3000 advertisements appeared in over 70 newspapers printed in each of the original thirteen colonies. Physicians and apothecaries ‘used and sold peppermint-based products in every major city in every colony’.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn11" id="fnref11">11</a></sup><br>
<var title="World"></var><br>
<var title="Atlantic"></var></p>
<p>American colonists were quick to recognize the commercial opportunity presented by locally producing peppermint oil rather than importing it from Britain, no doubt due in part to the ease of growing mint in a variety of environments. Unlike other varieties of mint, the peppermint plant would have been propagated in early America using root cuttings probably from a small number of original plants in England. Commercial peppermint production then, gradually shifted from England to America from the 1750s and likewise, records of peppermint fields in North America show that the first were found near <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashfield,_Massachusetts">Ashfield in Franklin country, Massachusetts</a>. Mint was later farmed in northern New York and New Jersey. In these early days, essence <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peddler">peddlers</a> ensured that peppermint was part of a widespread production and distribution network.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn12" id="fnref12">12</a></sup><br>
<var title="New England"></var><br>
<var title="Ashfield" id="Q2536103"></var><br>
<var title="New York State" id="Q1384"></var><br>
<var title="New Jersey" id="Q1408"></var></p>
<p>By the mid-1850s, America’s mint industry was focused in <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wayne_County,_New_York">Wayne County, New York</a>. Up until this time peppermint oil was valued for its therapeutic properties. However as American medicine developed according to new scientific knowledge, herbal remedies lost their popularity and peppermint oil needed a new market. American peppermint would become a popular flavor for confectionary on local and global scales.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn13" id="fnref13">13</a></sup></p>
<p>Over time, American mint oil production would spread westwards from the east coast in New York State to the Pacific coast in Washington. First, peppermint went to <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohio">Ohio</a> and <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michigan">Michigan</a> by 1833, and then commercial peppermint was introduced to <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idaho">Idaho</a> in 1903, as well as Oregon’s <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Willamette_Valley">Willamette River Valley</a> in 1909. In 1917, drained land on <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Puget_Island,_Washington">Puget Island</a> in Columbia River estuary in <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wahkiakum_County,_Washington">Wahkiakum County</a>, Washington  proved to be ideal land for mint farming on the Pacific coast. By the late 1920s, mint oil prices were high, no doubt influenced by significant advertising campaigns fashioned by American manufacturers of mint-flavored confectionary, chewing gum and toothpaste. Not only was mint valued in the domestic market, but it was exported too. World War II slowed down exportation of mint but the increased need for menthol from American-grown peppermint for supplying the armed forces saw peppermint (along with spearmint) become an essential war crop.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn14" id="fnref14">14</a></sup><br>
<var title="World"></var><br>
<var title="Ohio" id="Q1397"></var><br>
<var title="Michigan" id="Q1166"></var><br>
<var title="Willamette" id="Q1703681"></var><br>
<var title="Puget Island" id="Q3593402"></var><br>
<var title="North America"></var><br>
<var title="North America"></var></p>
<p>The mint industry in Washington and Oregon would go on to develop in line with sophisticated mechanical planting techniques and harvesting equipment. More recently, Washington farmers have faced increasing competition from China and India, who appear able to supply the shifting consumer taste for a stronger mint flavor which cannot be easily provided by the peppermint species.<br>
<var id="China-map"></var><br>
<var title="China" id="Q148"></var><br>
<var title="China"></var></p>
<h3 id="conclusions">Conclusions</h3>
<p>The example of the mint market in British North American colonies and the early United States shows that peppermint has always been an item of commerce, and an inherently commercial crop. While the naming of mint species may have constantly been in flux, American peppermint was cultivated from species that we can trace today. In fact the majority of commercial peppermint (over half of which is used for gum) descends from <em>Mentha Piperita</em> named ‘Black Mitcham’ and ‘White Mitcham’ in the nineteenth century; varieties of mint that were introduced into Michigan from Surrey, England by 1883 because of its hardy nature.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn15" id="fnref15">15</a></sup></p>
<p>Today, mint varieties are cultivated in many different parts of the world. Mint’s seemingly ‘cosmopolitan distribution’ means that its range extends across the world where there are appropriate habitats for it to flourish. Mints thrive when near water which means that lakes, rivers and even spaces in shade enable this fast-growing plant to be grown all year round. For example, wild mint (<a href="https://plants.jstor.org/stable/10.5555/al.ap.specimen.k000929997?searchUri=filter%3Dname%26so%3Dps_group_by_genus_species%2Basc%26Query%3DMentha%2Barvensis"><em>Mentha</em> arvensis</a>) is cultivated on a huge scale in Brazil, China, Paraguay, Japan, Thailand, Angola and India.<sup class="footnote-ref"><a href="#fn16" id="fnref16">16</a></sup> In this way, peppermint production in America, spreading across the breadth of the country over time, is a microcosm of the pattern of mint distribution across the world.</p>
<p>Mint is ubiquitous, and perhaps that is because it has remained relevant across time and space. Here, mint reveals something of the early difficulties of botanical exchange and naming, it speaks to the local and global movement of plants; it exposes changes and developments in medical thought and practices over time (the changing popularity of herbal remedies for example), and it continues to play a role in global consumer markets and advertising. Mint, in other words, will always be relevant for historical, cultural and geographical studies. And as Haides called the plant forth to ensure that Mintha would never be forgotten, we too are constantly reminded of this plant as we go about our daily lives.</p>
<h3 id="references">References</h3>
<hr class="footnotes-sep">
<section class="footnotes">
<ol class="footnotes-list">
<li id="fn1" class="footnote-item"><p>H. L. Jones, translation, <em>The Geography of Strabo</em>, vols. 1-8 (London, 1917). <a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn2" class="footnote-item"><p>See W. Smith (ed.), <em>Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology</em>, (Ann Abor, Michigan, 2005); C. Kerenyi, <em>Eleusis: Archetypal Image of Mother and Daughter</em> (Princeton, 1967) 40. <a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn3" class="footnote-item"><p>‘The Feate of Gardening’, by ION Gardener, The earliest original English treatise on Gardening, MS, C. 1440, Trinity College Cambridge, transcribed by Evelyn and printed in Archaologia, 1894, see: E. Cecil, A history of gardening in England (London, 1910), 64. H. John, The First English Garden Book: Mayster Jon Gardener’s Treatise and Its Background, <em>Garden History</em>, 13:2. 1985, 83–101. <em>JSTOR</em>, <a href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/1586825;">www.jstor.org/stable/1586825;</a>. <a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn4" class="footnote-item"><p>Wd: Q2141696 <a href="#fnref4" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn5" class="footnote-item"><p>J. E. Smith, XIX. Observations on the British Species of Mentha, <em>Transactions of the Linnaean Society of London</em>, 5:1 (February 1800), 174. <a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn6" class="footnote-item"><p>J. E. Smith, 171. <a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn7" class="footnote-item"><p>B. M. Lawrence (ed.), Mint: the genus Mentha (Boca Raton, FL, 2006) 3. <a href="#fnref7" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn8" class="footnote-item"><p>See B. M. Lawrence. <a href="#fnref8" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn9" class="footnote-item"><p>J. E. Landing, Peppermint and Spearmint in the United States, <em>Journal of Geography</em>, 67: 9 (1968) 548-553: 549. <a href="#fnref9" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn10" class="footnote-item"><p>N. K. Ellis and E. C. Stevenson, Domestic production of the essential oils of peppermint and spearmint, <em>Economic Botany</em>, 4:2 (1950) 139-149. <a href="#fnref10" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn11" class="footnote-item"><p>D. Allosso, <em>Peppermint Kings: a rural American history</em>, Doctoral Dissertation, 2019, 21-22. <a href="#fnref11" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn12" class="footnote-item"><p>See A. M. Todd, Mint: Its Early History and Modern Commercial Development, <em>Proceedings of the American Pharmaceutical Association at the fifty-first annual meeting</em> (Philadelphia: The Association, 1903). J. E. Landing, The cultivation of peppermint and spearmint, <em>Southeastern Geographer</em>, 3 (1963) 28–33. <em>JSTOR</em>, <a href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/44988531;">www.jstor.org/stable/44988531;</a> D. Allosso, Peppermint Kings. <a href="#fnref12" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn13" class="footnote-item"><p>J. Duffy, <em>From Humors to Medical Science: A History of American Medicine</em> (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993). <a href="#fnref13" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn14" class="footnote-item"><p>See N. K. Ellis, Peppermint and Spearmint Production, <em>Economic Botany</em>, 14:4 (1960) 280–285. JSTOR, <a href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/4252193;">www.jstor.org/stable/4252193;</a> O. R. Jones, Essence of Peppermint, a History of the Medicine and Its Bottle, <em>Historical Archaeology</em>, 15: 2 (1981) 1–57. <em>JSTOR</em>, <a href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/25615407;">www.jstor.org/stable/25615407;</a> J E. Landing, <em>American Essence; a History of the Peppermint and Spearmint Industry in the United States</em> (Kalamazoo, 1969). <a href="#fnref14" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn15" class="footnote-item"><p>James. E. Landing, Peppermint and Spearmint. <a href="#fnref15" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
<li id="fn16" class="footnote-item"><p>B. Salehi et al., Plants of Genus <em>Mentha</em>: From Farm to Food Factory, <em>Plants</em>, 7.3:70 (2018) <a href="#fnref16" class="footnote-backref">↩︎</a></p>
</li>
</ol>
</section>

