<param ve-config
	   title="Monotropa uniflora: Finding Emily's Flowers"
	   source-image="https://www.talkplant.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/mushroom-1853282_1920.jpg"
	   eid=""
	   about=""
	   layout="vtl"
	   author="John Hessler">

The American poet, Emily Dickinson (1830-1886), called the ghost plant, Monotropa uniflora, "the preferred flower of life." In a letter to Mabel Loomis Todd, she wrote of her memories and fascination with its ephemeral and otherworldly beauty, "I still cherish the clutch with which I bore it from the ground when a wondering child, an unearthly booty, and maturity only enhances the mystery, never decreases it."
<param ve-image url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/0a/Indian_pipe_PDB.JPG">

Emily Dickinson seems to have had a long relationship with the plant that she found in the woods around Boston and Amherst. She wrote a poem, which she never published, to the "Indian Pipe," one of the common names of the plant: 'Tis whiter than an Indian Pipe-Tis dimmer than a Lace-No statue has it, like a fog. When you approach the place-Not any voice imply it here-Or intimate it there-A Spirit-how doth it accost-What function hath the Air? This limitless Hyperbole-Each one of us shall be-"Tis drama-if Hypothesis-It be not Tragedy."
<param ve-image manifest="https://iiif.lib.harvard.edu/manifests/view/drs:4184689$35i">

Monotropa uniflora, or Emily's Monotropa, is a perennial flower that is found in the forests of the eastern United States and into the west. It is not commonly encountered and is one of a group of plants now known for their parasitic reliance on fungi and trees. Dickinson herself preserved a specimen in her surviving herbarium , which she created when she began pursuing botany in a systematic way in her teens, and her collection contains more than 400 flowers from the time when she was a student at Amherst Academy, between 1839 and 1846.

Plants like Montropa uniflora contain no chlorophyll, and are translucent, or of colors that appear strangely out of place under the dense forest canopy in which they grow. These colors, ranging from whites and yellows, to the lightest of pinks, give them the ghostly appearance from which they derive their common names. Getting their nourishment and organic carbon from a host, in most cases a tree, they tap into an intermediary mycorrizal fungus attached to the roots of an unsuspecting the host plant.

Monotropa uniflora, Emily's flower, is a member of the Monotropoiddeae subfamily of the Ericaceae, or Heaths, all of which are mycotrophs. Since they cannot produce their own nourishment using photosynthesis, mycotrophic wildflowers exploit the symbiotic relationship that develops between forest trees and fungi. Mycotrophic plants tap into and parasitize the hyphae of a mycorrhizal fungus by reversing the flow of carbon (derived from the host tree) and other nutrients to meet their survival needs. The unlucky fungus feeds the parasitic wildflower and receives nothing in return. For this reason, they are often said to be epi-parasitic on other plants.

Pollinated by bees Monotropa uniflora (Monotropa – once turned; uniflora – one flowered) ranges in height from 10 to 30 centimeters. The entire plant is a translucent, ghostly white, sometimes pale pinkish-white and commonly has black flecks. The leaves are scale-like and flecked with black on the flower stalk (peduncle). As the Latin epithet uniflora implies, the stem bears a single flower. Upon emerging from the ground, the flower is pendant (downwardly pointed). As the anthers and stigma mature, the flower spreads and becomes almost perpendicular to the stem. When the fruit capsule of the flower matures, the flower grows in line with the stem and once ripened, the seed is released through slits that open from the tip to the base of the capsule. The plant is persistent after seed dispersal but fades quickly in the long summer days.

The history of scientific research on these strange and mysterious plants, really begins in 1821, when the botanist and director of the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, William Hooker (1795-1865), asked the simple question: is M. hypopithys and other plants like it, ‘parasitic on the roots of other plants?’

Monotropa uniflora has been the subject of study for many years, as scientists have tried to understand the origin and evolution of mycotrophic plants. In the case of uniflora several studies have tried to discover the fungal hosts that the plant has used. In the case of specimens located in the Eastern United States the plant appears to favor members of the fungus family Russilaceae, in particular those from the genus Russula.

Monotropa uniflora was used in the nineteenth century as an anxiolytic medicine used to calm anxiety. According to King's American Dispensatory, from 1896, the roots of the plant should be gathered in September or October, carefully dried and pulverized.

Another rarely encountered mycotrophic flower is Monotropa hypopitys, commonly known as Pinesap or the Dutchman's Pipe. Monotropa hypopitys (Monotropa – once turned; hypopitys – under the pine or fir from its habitat) ranges in height from 10 to 35 centimeters. The entire plant is a pale creamy white, coral pink or red. The leaves are scale-like and occur along the flower stalk (peduncle). The inflorescence is a raceme of 2 to 11 flowers at the tip of the flower stalk. Upon emerging from the ground, the flowers are pendant. As the anthers and stigma mature, the flowers spread and become most perpendicular to the stem. The fruit is a capsule that once ripened, the seed is released through slits that open from the tip to the base of the capsules. The plant is persistent after the seeds have dispersed and is endangered in most places in its range.

Charles Darwin, at the end of On the Origin of Species writes: "It is interesting to contemplate an entangled bank, clothed with many plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth, and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different from each other in so complex a manner, have all been produced by laws acting around us."

As part of Darwin's tangled bank, the evolution and natural history of mycotrophic plants is still being worked out using modern DNA sequencing and fieldwork on a large number of species from around the world. They remain however, for those of us who are interested in them, and who seek them out in the dark and secretive places where they grow, in many ways the same as Emily Dickinson saw them, as a mysterious, and "unearthly booty." Dickinson's love of the plant and its surprising beauty and strangeness reflected her love of nature and is echoed by another modernist writer, Nan Shepherd (1893-1981), who wrote in her The Living Mountain, " The more one learns of this intricate interplay of soil, altitude, weather, and the living tissues of plant and insect, the more the mystery deepens. Knowledge does not dispel mystery.
