<param ve-config
	   title="The Plant Humanities Initiative"
	   layout="vtl">

## About the Plant Humanities Lab
Welcome to Plant Humanities Lab. The Plant Humanities Lab is an innovative digital space that supports the interdisciplinary study of plants from the various perspectives of the arts, sciences, and humanities, to explore their extraordinary significance to human culture. <span style="color: green; border-bottom: none; font-size: 75%;">_Click the play button to the right of the image to learn more about the medicinal significance of peony._</span>
<param ve-image region="-262,533,2623,2020"
	title="Ming herbal (painting): Chinese herbaceous peony"
	url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2e/Ming_herbal_%28painting%29%3B_Chinese_herbaceous_peony_Wellcome_L0039426.jpg">

Humans rely on plants for our most fundamental individual and social needs: from food, medicine, and construction to our encounters with them in art and literature. Although we think of plants as rooted in place, their global travels over the millennia offer fascinating pathways into the past and illuminate some of the most burning issues of today, including legacies of colonial violence and displacement. Climate change, habitat loss, and the accelerated species extinctions add to the urgency of researching plant–human interactions and acknowledging the importance of plants in our environment.
<span style="color: green; border-bottom: none; font-size: 75%;">_Hover over the map to discover the travels of the first domesticated bananas._</span>
<param ve-map title="Origins of Banana" center="4.1003374311994225, 118.95910714007888" basemap="Esri_WorldPhysical" zoom="3.5" stroke-width="0">
<param ve-map-layer geojson active url="https://jstor-labs.github.io/plant-humanities/geojson/banana_distribution.json">

## So Many Stories to Tell
The Plant Humanities Lab presents fascinating stories of plants from far-flung places around the world. Consider the [cassava:](/cassava) poisonous when eaten raw, it was rendered harmless by indigenous methods of processing this plant into food, so that today it is a diet staple of more than 600 million people. You can use an interactive map to follow cassava’s travels from the Americas, where it was cultivated already in 8000 BCE, to its global distribution today. Beautiful images—from a remarkable ceramic by a Moche artist living in present-day Peru to <span data-click-image-zoomto="563,3033,3228,2424">a colored print</span> by the eighteenth-century naturalist Maria Sibylla Merian—allow us to reconstruct this story. The stories presented here, all of which have been peer reviewed by a community of Plant Humanities experts, showcase the global mobility of plants in the context of their economic, aesthetic, medicinal, culinary, political, and cultural significance. Follow these guided interactive tours or explore the many resources we offer as starting points for your own explorations. <span style="color: green; border-bottom: none; font-size: 75%;">_Click "a colored print" to explore the details of this image._</span>
<param ve-image region="-18,-330,4579,6613" manifest="https://iiif.lib.harvard.edu/manifests/drs:481769537" title="_Cassave_ (_Cassava_), in Maria Sybilla Merian (1647–1717), _Dissertatio de generatione et metamorphosibus insectorum Surinamensium_ (Amstelaedami: Apud Joannem Oosterwyk, 1719), pl. 5." seq="17" attribution="Dumbarton Oaks Research Library, Washington, D.C.">
<param ve-image region="-18,-330,4579,6613" manifest="https://iiif.lib.harvard.edu/manifests/drs:481769537" title="_Cassave_ (_Cassava_), in Maria Sybilla Merian (1647–1717), _Dissertatio de generatione et metamorphosibus insectorum Surinamensium_ (Amstelaedami: Apud Joannem Oosterwyk, 1719), pl. 4." seq="15" attribution="Dumbarton Oaks Research Library, Washington, D.C.">

## Project Background
The plant stories presented here emerge from the interests of an [interdisciplinary team](/bios/README.md) whose members span various career stages, from doctoral and post-doctoral researchers and undergraduates to graduate summer participants of the [Dumbarton Oaks Plant Humanities Initiative.](https://www.doaks.org/research/mellon-initiatives/plant-humanities-initiative) Contributors explore the holdings of the Dumbarton Oaks rare book library—a rich collection of herbals, horticultural treatises, and albums of botanical illustrations—and other special collections. As we add more stories, data, and additional features, we will continue to strive for a broad range of perspectives, historical periods, and geographies. _Scroll through the timeline to learn more about how historical sources reveal the movements and meanings of plants._
<param ve-knightlab-timeline source="1gtN_aUHlOPEZr_APokEFgx4cJGoy4wKMha-UavmXiKk&" timenav-position="bottom" hash-bookmark="false" initial-zoom="1" height="680">

Bringing together humanists and digital technology experts, the Plant Humanities Lab was developed collaboratively by Dumbarton Oaks and JSTOR Labs as part of the Plant Humanities Initiative, with funding from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. _Click through this interactive network to explore the vital role Heliconias play in the broader ecosystem as a source of food and shelter._
<param ve-d3plus-ring-network 
       url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JSTOR-Labs/plant-humanities/develop/data/heliconia_network_relationship_v2.tsv" center="Heliconia imbricata">

The Plant Humanities Lab draws on the power of Linked Open Data and uses a variety of digital tools to connect primary sources in vast repositories that include JSTOR Global Plants and the Biodiversity Heritage Library. Key to development was JSTOR Labs’s Juncture, a new, open-source tool for digital writing, which our contributors used to write their stories. _Specimens from Global Plants and historical sources from the Biodiversity Heritage Library are displayed as IIIF images, which allow the user to zoom in and out, and examine these important sources in detail._
<param ve-image region="-79,626,6307,4735" title="“Cinnamon from Ceylon with flowers”. Specimen of _Cinnamomum verum_ J.Presl, from Paul Hermann’s herbarium of plants from Sri Lanka in Leiden, specimen no. L.2070171."
	url="/cinnamon/007714869-L.2070171.jpg"
	attribution="Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Leiden. https://data.biodiversitydata.nl/naturalis/specimen/L.2070171">
