<param ve-config
	   title="Dittany: Women’s Herbs and Reproductive Control"
	   source-image="https://ia800806.us.archive.org/BookReader/BookReaderImages.php?id=floragraecasive6sibt&itemPath=%2F7%2Fitems%2Ffloragraecasive6sibt&server=ia800806.us.archive.org&page=n200_w925"
	   layout="vtl"
	   num-maps="13"
	   num-images="11"
	   num-specimens="0"
	   num-primary-sources="6"
	   author="Ashley Buchanan, PhD">
     
### Herbs and Women’s Health
Thanks to scientific advancements in women’s health as well as the availability and effectiveness of contraceptives, twenty-first century women generally assume that we enjoy greater agency over health and fertility than women of the pre-modern world. We accept that without modern obstetrics, gynecology, and hormonal contraceptives, our foremothers were simply victims of biology—if they survived the perils of their first pregnancy and childbirth, they spent much of their lives pregnant. While it is true that for much of history women did not have reproductive knowledge derived from technological advancements and modern gynecology, it is incorrect to assume that they had no reproductive knowledge or choice. In fact, for much of history, women’s agency over their health and fertility was due in large part to their knowledge of medicinal herbs; herbs like dittany.
<param ve-image
       title="Foetal positions in womb, illustration to Soranus, Gynaecia (Manuscript: Brussels, Bibliothèque Royale, ms. 3701-15, fol. 28r)"
       attribution="Anonymous Unknown author, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons"
       url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/21/Foetal_positions_BR_3701-15_28r.jpg">

### An Ancient Herb from an Ancient Tradition
Dittany has been used as a medicinal herb, particularly for women’s health, for more than 2,000 years. Roman stateman and naturalist [Pliny the Elder wrote](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:latinLit:phi0978.phi001.perseus-eng1:26.90) that dittany “… acts as an emmenagogue, and is an expellent of the fœtus when dead or lying transversely in the uterus… indeed so active is it in its effects that ordinarily it is forbidden to be introduced into the chamber of a woman lying-in...”[^1] In his description, Pliny mentions two types of dittany—"dittany” and “Pseudodictamnum,” also known as bastard (or false) dittany. While both types of dittany worked as an emmenagogue or to help expel a fetus, as the name suggested, pseudo or bastard dittany was considered less potent. 
<param ve-map center="42.49801090891067, 21.940742687948333" zoom="4" stroke-width="0" show-labels>
<param ve-map-layer geojson url="/geojson/dittany.json" title="Dittany Distribution" active> 

By the beginning of the Medieval period, the works of classical authors such as Pliny and Dioscorides were continuously collected and reproduced to create a genre of manuscripts known collectively as herbals. Today, we define herbals as a family of related books produced by naturalists, physicians, and proto botanists that identify and describe plants through text and/or illustrations and explain plants’ medicinal virtues, often incorporating local or indigenous knowledge as well as recipes for therapeutic preparations. As a genre, herbals were also highly interconnected. Authors of herbals routinely cited one another, commented on, or translated previously published herbals, synthesizing information on plant nomenclature, origin, and botanical lore in the process. 
<param ve-knightlab-timeline source="1mlXQQ3VKfeYznV2VktShOQd2-7aH5p52_n20LQ1U0uE" timenav-position="bottom" hash-bookmark="false" initial-zoom="1" height="680">

One such lore was the power of dittany for women’s health. According to Dioscorides, arguably the most influential ancient author on medicinal herbs, “diktamnos” was a hot plant with woolly leaves, and true dittany grew only on the island of Crete. Like Pliny, Dioscorides described the medical virtues of dittany (and bastard dittany) for women, which he said when drunk, used as suppository (pessary), or burned as incense had the power to expel a dead fetus. Dioscorides’s _De Materia Medica_ served as the foundational text for most European herbal manuscripts. As such, Dioscorides’s description of dittany, as well as his claim that it had the power to quicken birth and expel a dead fetus, was repeated in Medieval herbal manuscripts as well as early modern printed herbals.
<param ve-image
       title="'Ditamo bianco' (Origanum dictamnus, dittany of Crete)"
       attribution="[Herbal containing 192 drawings of plants], in Italian and Latin. Manuscript on paper. Veneto? Italy, S. XV, Manuscript Number: ljs419"
       url="http://images.library.upenn.edu/mrsidsceti/bin/image_jpeg.pl?coll=schoenberg&subcoll=ljs419&image=ljs419_body0057.sid&level=2">

By the early modern period, [dittany was often described in herbals in three forms](https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/56599913). The first was true dittany, a rare herb which grew only on rocky cliffs on the island of Crete. The second was white dittany (sometimes called fraxinella), and the third was bastard or false dittany. Today, these correlate to three different species across three related genera—_Origanum dictamnus_, _Dictamnus albus_, and _Ballota pseudodictamnus_ respectively. While we now classify dittany as three distinct species, in early modern herbals the main differences between the three were origin and, most importantly, potency. Whether described in two or three forms, all types of dittany in early modern herbals continued to be classified as a potent emmenagogue and an expellant for both a fetus and afterbirth.
<param ve-plant-specimen eid="Q1227336" max="1">
<param ve-plant-specimen eid="Q2643074" max="1">
<param ve-plant-specimen eid="Q15345437" max="1">

### Herbals and Women’s Medical Knowledge 
It is important to note that ancient, medieval, and early modern herbals were by and large written by men and were the product of a learned textual tradition rather than lay or common knowledge.[^2] As such, the simple appearance of dittany as an herb for women’s health in herbals is not sufficient evidence to suggest that women knew the plant’s medicinal virtues and used it accordingly. However, while the initial production of early modern herbals was spurred by learned medical humanist seeking to elucidating classical scholarship to produce more useful guides for identifying medicinal plants, the popularity and proliferation of herbals increased substantially over the course of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. This indicates that herbals were consumed by an increasingly larger audience. Furthermore, many herbals produced in the late 16th century, such as [Castore Durante’s 1585 Roman herbal](https://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/49828671), were simplified versions of more complicated Latin herbals, written in the vernacular and, thus, far more accessible to a wider, albeit literate, audience.
<param ve-image
       title="I discorsi by M. Pietro Andrea Matthioli"
       attribution="Via BHL"
       url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/51721921">
<param ve-image
       title="Herbario nuouo, Castore Durante"
       attribution="Via BHL"
       url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/49828671">

Additionally, historians of early modern medicine have demonstrated that elite and middling European women actively read printed vernacular medical books such as herbals and advice manuals in addition to collecting medicinal recipes, since they were expected to have general medical knowledge in order to fulfill their Christian duties as wives, mothers, and caregivers, both within the home and the community.[^3] Recipe collections are particularly telling when assessing the intersection of learned and lay medicine. Recipes collected and circulated by elite women often incorporated, combined, or refined medicinal knowledge found in herbals. For example, in a set of seventeenth century handwritten recipes dealing with issues of conception, the author, Rebecca Winch (d. 1713), listed the ingredients for a potion used for “[purging the wombe from all hurtfull or superfillus humers which hinder conception.](https://luna.folger.edu/luna/servlet/detail/FOLGER~3~3~31~260067?qvq=q%3Adittany%3Bsort%3Acall_number%2Cmpsortorder1%3Blc%3AFOLGER~3~3&mi=6&trs=10)” The ingredients for the potion included mugwort, pennyroyal, and dittany of Crete, all commonly described as substances that provoke menstruation, birth, and afterbirth in early modern herbals. (image of the recipe)
<param ve-image
       title="Receipt book of Rebeckah Winche [manuscript]."
       attribution="Folger Shakespeare Library, LUNA: Folger Manuscript Transcriptions Collection"
       url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JSTOR-Labs/plant-humanities/develop/images/112269.jpg">
<param ve-image
       title="Receipt book of Rebeckah Winche [manuscript]."
       attribution="Folger Shakespeare Library, LUNA: Folger Manuscript Transcriptions Collection"
       url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JSTOR-Labs/plant-humanities/develop/images/112270.jpg">

There is also evidence that women not only consumed herbals and vernacular medical literature, but they also passed them down through generations. Historian Kevin Hayes’s has illustrated how colonial women passed down Nicolas Culpeper's _London Dispensatory_, the first medical work to be printed in America. A 1667 London edition of Culpeper's _Dispensatory_ in the Boston Medical Library was originally owned by Elizabeth Greenleaf who passed the copy to her daughter Grace. Grace eventually gave the book to her sister. Further evidence can be found in a 1720 edition of Culpeper's _Dispensatory_, also in the Boston Medical Library, which contains an inscription stating that the book was passed down to Rachel Martin by her mother 5 days before she died on 13 March 1765.[^4] [Culpeper's Dispensatory](https://books.google.com/books?id=t5VkAAAAcAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=Culpeper%27s+London+Dispensatory&hl=it&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjTv6bk7IztAhU6F1kFHQlFDmAQ6AEwAHoECAIQAg#v=onepage&q&f=false) lists both white dittany and dittany of Crete as a root that “promotes the terms [menstruation].” While collecting recipes and consuming printed herbals was not something all women could afford or had access to, it was commonplace and expected of middling and elite women. (image of Culpepper)

### Dittany and Reproductive Control
As we can see, by the early modern period, dittany had been prescribed as an herb for women’s reproductive health for more than a millennium. We also know that middling and elite women were aware of the purgative powers of dittany. Particularly notable was its use as an effective emmenagogue. In ancient, medieval, and early modern European medicine, regular menstruation was viewed as essential to a woman’s health. Male physicians offered numerous theories and explanations as to why women menstruated; however, all agreed that missed or delayed periods signaled an imbalance or corruption of the humors. Menstruation was viewed akin to a purge, either as a means to purify the female body or to expel excess blood—and unexpelled menstrual fluid was deemed harmful. Thus, when a woman suffered from delayed menstruation, she turned to known emmenagogic herbs to induce bleeding and return her to health. (Medieval image of woman in repose)
<param ve-image
       title="Drawing from a 13th-century manuscript of Pseudo-Apuleius's ''Herbarium'', depicting a pregnant woman in repose, while another holds some an herb in one hand and prepares a concotion using a mortar and pestle with the other."
       attribution="Reproduced in _From Contraception and Abortion from the Ancient World to the Renaissance_ by John M. Riddle, via Wikimedia Commons"
       url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/archive/d/d4/20101221012234%21Medievalpreg.jpg">

As many historians of science and medicine have concluded, the use of herbs to “draw the menses down” or “provoke menstruation” was rather well-known and commonplace in pre-modern Europe.[^5] For example, Durante’s popular herbal, listed [160 plants](https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/49829022) capable of provoking menstruation, including three types of dittany. Mattioli’s influential herbal listed [148](https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/51721123#page/127/mode/1up) and Gerard’s recorded [26](https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/57082515) plants or plant-based remedies capable of provoking menstruation. Historians postulate that women of lower social classes would have known of the medicinal uses of herbs through the oral tradition that paralleled the written sources and was subsequently largely lost with the professionalization of medicine and the increasing religious and legal restrictions on women’s reproduction. 

The ubiquity of emmenagogic herbs has led some scholars to question the explicit usage of these herbs. In the early 90’s historian John Riddle posited that herbs like dittany were actually used to control fertility and prevent unwanted pregnancy.[^6] As is the case today, delayed or missed menstruation in the early modern world could have been caused by any number of health and environmental factors. Pregnancy, however, was and remains a leading cause. Therefore, argued Riddle, emmenagogues were not only used to restore women’s health but were also employed as a means to prevent or terminate unwanted pregnancies. In his entry on stinking gladdon, Gerard stated, “[It profiteth being used in a pessarie, to provoke the termes, and to cause abortion.](https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/57081035)” While this sort of explicit statement was rare, it clearly associated provoking menstruation with ending pregnancy. Additionally, early modern printed medical books routinely caution women from using emmenagogic herbs while pregnant. For example, a popular 1684 English sex and midwifery manual, Aristotle's Masterpiece, instructed women on the precautions to take after they think they have conceived: “Let her abstain from all things which may provoke either urine or the courses [menstruation]…” While intended to help women safeguard a desired pregnancy, this passage also clearly associates inducing menstruation with terminating a pregnancy. 

The line between contraception (avoiding pregnancy) and abortion (terminating pregnancy) was not as clear in the pre-modern world. Because of this, historians argue that using herbs to terminate an early pregnancy was not only socially acceptable, it was also legally permissible. Unlike contemporary science, premodern theories of conception did not distinguish between an embryo and a fetus. Early modern sources also didn’t assign full personhood to a fetus. Furthermore, a woman in the early modern world was not pregnant until she declared it. Without our contemporary tests and ultrasounds, detecting pregnancy within the first few months was difficult, and, thus, left up to the mother. Prior to the professionalization of obstetrics, it was women, not male physicians, who determined when a fetus became viable. The quickening—when a pregnant woman began to feel or perceive fetal movements, usually between fifteen to seventeen weeks (three to four months)—was the most important confirmation of a viable pregnancy and often when women announced it. (timeline of the history of abortion?)

The knowledge of how to provoke menstruation through herbs gave pre-modern women some reproductive control, either as a means to regulate menstruation to increase the likelihood of conception or as a means to end an unwanted, early-stage pregnancy. For more than 1,500 years medical texts and herbals associated dittany with women’s health, particularly with issues of menstruation as well as labor and delivery. This long association coupled with the evidence that early modern elite and middling women read and applied plant knowledge derived from herbals suggests that pre-modern women in the west did indeed seek to exercise agency over fertility and reproduction, and that medicinal herbs like dittany were central to this endeavor.

### References
[^1]: John Bostock and H. T. Riley (1855). "Pliny the Elder, The Natural History". Perseus at Tufts. Retrieved May 26, 2020. http://data.perseus.org/citations/urn:cts:latinLit:phi0978.phi001.perseus-eng1:26.90
[^2]: It should be noted that there were some female-authored medieval pharmacopeias, most notably Hildegard of Bingen’s Physica and the Trotula. For more on the Trotula, see Green, Monica H., ed. and trans.  The ‘Trotula’: A Medieval Compendium of Women’s Medicine. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2001.
[^3]: Leong, Elaine. "'Herbals She Peruseth': Reading Medicine in Early Modern England." Renaissance Studies 28, no. 4 (2014): 556-78. Accessed November 18, 2020. http://www.jstor.org/stable/24423854.
[^4]: Hayes, Kevin J. A Colonial Woman's Bookshelf. Eugene: Wipf and Stock Publishers, 2016, 94.
[^5]: Lindemann, Mary. Medicine and Society in Early Modern Europe. 2nd ed. New Approaches to European History. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010, 21-23.
[^6]: Riddle, John M. Eve's Herbs: A History of Contraception and Abortion in the West. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1997.
