<param ve-config
       title="Sunflower: Shining a Light on Knowledges, Myths, and Meanings"
       author="Kristan M. Hanson, PhD"
       source-image="https://ia800500.us.archive.org/BookReader/BookReaderImages.php?id=monographTrochi2Goul&itemPath=%2F12%2Fitems%2FmonographTrochi2Goul&server=ia800500.us.archive.org&page=n285_w1713"
       banner="https://bibdigital.rjb.csic.es/i/?IIIF=/43/8d/9e/4c/438d9e4c-7775-4cb9-8e4d-8eb26c4a1cf0/iiif/BES_Hort_2_000140.tif/428.0550928891736,553.1346957733396,2234.3561819346573,1347.914537854157/!1102,665/0/default.jpg"
       layout="vtl">

### A Giant among Us

<param ve-image fit="contain" url="https://www.rct.uk/sites/default/files/collection-online/8/1/257146-1330624291.jpg" title="Alexander Marshal, _Common sunflower and greyhound_, c. 1650-82, Royal Collection Trust / © Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 2020">
<param ve-entity eid="Q171497" aliases="Helianthus annuus" title="sunflower"> 
Sunflowers hold a special status in the natural world. Highly valued for their edible seeds and seed oil, they are one of the few crop plants to have originated in North America. They are also popular ornamentals, renowned for their yellow flower heads with round disks and, in some cases, imposing height. Indeed, in cultivation Helianthus annuus (common sunflower) can grow up to sixteen feet tall, towering over us and other organisms. Yet, despite the relatively widespread cultivation of the sunflower and its iconic qualities, myths about the genus persist and these ideas have often shaped or been shaped by visual representations of the plant.


European, American, and Native American portrayals of the sunflower can provide valuable information about the histories of the plant and about the use of visual means to communicate knowledges, myths, and meanings relating to it. Artists, working from the European colonial period to the present day, often produced likenesses of the sunflower that fulfilled scientific, aesthetic, ceremonial, commercial, and other functions. Although such artists developed conventions for representing the plant that were tailored to realizing those aims, they consistently engaged with cultural beliefs about the flower’s formal resemblance to the sun and, less often so, with misconceptions about the mature plant being heliotropic. These trends in iconography helped to perpetuate several myths about the sunflower that are still widely held today, while sometimes also propagating or illuminating stereotypes about societal markers of difference.
<param ve-image url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/40/Sunflower_sky_backdrop.jpg" title="Sunflower, attributed to Iampinkavocado, CC Attribution-Share Alike 4.0 International">

### _Helianthus_—The Iconic Flower and Its Iconography

<param ve-image iiif fit="contain" url="https://www.doaks.org/resources/online-exhibits/margaret-mee-portraits-of-plants/plant-portraits/19/@@images/image" title="Margaret Mee, _Heliconia psittacorum_, 1964, gouache, Dumbarton Oaks">
<param ve-entity eid="Q10432667306" title="Carl LinnaeusHeliconia psittacorum" aliases="H. psittacorum">
The genus _Helianthus_—a Latin compound derived from the Greek words _helios_ (sun) and _anthos_ (flower)—was named by the prominent Swedish naturalist Carolus Linnaeus in the eighteenth century, when the plant was still a rare curiosity in Europe. Although it may be hard for us to imagine that the sunflower was once regarded as a foreign luxury good, Linnaeus’s exuberant description of the plant, in Critica botanica, offers some insights. He writes, “Who can see this plant in flower, whose great golden blossoms send out rays in every direction from the circular disk, without admiring the handsome flower modeled on the sun’s shape?” His observations about the splendor of the mature Helianthus inflorescence demonstrate some traits that eighteenth-century Europeans admired and that make the flower so iconic today.

<param ve-entity eid="Q2269599" title="Curtis's Botanical Magazine" aliases="Curtis’s Botanical Magazine">
<param ve-image iiif fit="contain" url="https://ia800605.us.archive.org/BookReader/BookReaderImages.php?id=mobot31753002719653&itemPath=%2F12%2Fitems%2Fmobot31753002719653&server=ia800605.us.archive.org&page=n159_w377" title="_Heliconia psittacorum_, _Curtis's Botanical Magazine_, 1800, Missouri Botanical Garden, Peter H. Raven Library">
<param ve-image fit="contain" title="_Heliconia psittacorum. Parrot-Beaked Heliconia_, _Curtis's Botanical Magazine_, 1800, Missouri Botanical Garden, Peter H. Raven Library" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/469080">
Although Linnaeus gave Helianthus and H. annuus the botanical names by which they are officially known, it is arguable that the draftsperson, engraver, and colorist who produced the print, at right, helped to establish some enduring visual conventions for representing the sunflower in botanical circles and beyond. The engraved portrait of H. annuus, commissioned by Basilius Besler for the codex Hortus Eystettensis, provides a striking and memorable vision of the plant at roughly life size. The image’s impact derives in part from a cruciform composition that imbues the mature flower head with a sense of power, a strong vertical line that bisects the stem and the disk to make its centermost circle a focal point, and a well-balanced arrangement of leaves with expressive shapes that move the eye around the blossom and anchor it in space. Through this emphasis on the sunflower’s aesthetic characteristics, as opposed to its medicinal properties, as in herbals, the picture provided an iconographic model for depicting ornamentals that would inspire artists for generations to come.

### Range and Cultivation

<param ve-image fit="contain" primary url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kristanmhanson/plant-humanities/develop/images/mee_heliconia_uaupensis_RoyalBotanicGardenKew.jpg" title="Margaret Mee, _Heliconia uaupénsis_, © Copyright The Board of Trustees of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew">
The sunflowers represented in Besler’s Hortus Eystettensis and described by Linnaeus were cultivated species, descended from North American progenitors. The native range of the genus Helianthus stretches from British Columbia to southwest Mexico, though, as this map indicates, it has been introduced across the world. The plant is primarily cultivated today as an oil crop because its seeds are rich in nutrients and relatively low in fatty acids. After oil is extracted from seeds, the byproducts are repurposed for use as animal feed or, in the case of hulls, ground to produce roughage or fuel. Sunflower crops also provide seeds for confectionary food and birdfeed. Because sunflowers are able to extract harmful containments from soil and water, a process known as phytoremediation, they have been planted at the sites of the Chernobyl and Fukushima Daiichi disasters to absorb radiation. In addition to those uses, sunflowers are cultivated as ornamentals for domestic settings, and Native Americans use(d) the plant as a source of food, fuel, pigments, dye, medicine, and for ceremonial functions.

Paleoethnobotanists, who study plant remains collected at sites, have determined that Native Americans were using cultivated sunflowers in parts of North America by YEAR. Charles B. Heiser, Jr. and Bruce D. Smith, both prominent botanists, have analyzed charred seeds found at a number of different sites in order to consider when and where humans cultivated sunflowers. Heiser SENTENCE. Smith found that Heiser’s finds still stand.

### Plant Migration and Production of Knowledges

Discussion of herbals and their importance for communicating information about plants.

[Figure 11: earliest description of the sunflower by Nicolas Monardes, 1500s, link; earliest European representation of the sunflower by Dodoens, 1568, image; Besler 1613 codex, image]

Global plantings and uses as crop and ornamental

[Figure 12: wiki map and products]

Native American use of plant as dye for basketry and pollen in sandpainting ceremony

[Figure 13: basket, maybe MIA] 


### Out of One, Many

Our familiarity with the sunflower, both real and represented, may lead us to overlook the fact that its flower heads are not single blossoms. Helianthus, like other members of the aster family, Compositae (Asteraceae), produces a special kind of inflorescence that is a composite of many tiny flowers known as florets. This diagram of a mature flower head shows that its disk consists of florets and that what we generally call “petals” are actually ray florets. The disk florets, which number in the hundreds or thousands, grow in a spiral pattern and each one can develop its own seed after pollination. Although these traits may come as a surprise to us, botanical illustrators developed an iconography to communicate information about them in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.

This hand-colored print Anatomy of the Sunflower, based on a design by the artist Peter Henderson, exemplifies a sophisticated understanding of the plant. Henderson shows a partial view of two mature plants—one facing back, and the other nearly front—to communicate valuable information about their dorsal and ventral anatomical structures, while taking some aesthetic liberties to imbue the flower heads with a sense of movement and vitality. At the center of the left flower, a series of green scallop- and flame-like shapes describe how bracts, or modified leaves, grow in concentric layers. Their slight curvature contrasts with a leaf that curls exuberantly away from the plant’s stem, leading the eye to the opposite flower. Rust-orange “petals,” some with gold highlights, radiate outward from its dark-brown disk. A close look at the disk reveals a circular band composed of stylized representations of yellow, five-petaled florets. These details remind us that the study of art and flora are endeavors rooted in the practices of direct observation and visual analysis.

Henderson’s design for Anatomy of the Sunflower also articulates Linnaeus’s contributions to botany as they relate to Helianthus. Linnaeus developed a plant taxonomy that he based on the number, arrangement, and similarities of reproductive organs: stamen(s) and pistil(s). The tremendous influence of this system on the production of knowledge about and portrayal of plants is evident in the lower right corner of Anatomy of the Sunflower, where there are precise depictions of such organs. This series of details was essential to the function of the picture; it was commissioned by Dr. Robert John Thornton for his book New illustration of the sexual system of Carolus von Linnaeus. Thornton’s “new” book was distinct from an earlier publication on Linnaeus by John Miller, whose print Helianthus annuus served as the inspiration for or shared the same model as Henderson’s.

### Sun-Shaped though Not Necessarily Golden

We may also be surprised to discover the diversity within the genus Helianthus. Indeed, there are more than fifty accepted species grouped under Helianthus and, contrary to what is often portrayed in images and texts, their palette is not limited to yellow. Their color can range from gold to orange to red and even an unexpected shade of pink. Species also vary in terms of size and the number and shape of their leaves and flower heads, as demonstrated by these herbarium sheets with dried Helianthus annuus (common sunflower), Helianthus giganteus (giant sunflower), and Helianthus tuberosus (Jerusalem artichoke or sunchoke). The specimens also dispel the notion that sunflowers only have one large blossom per stock.

Still life paintings provide another rich source of evidence regarding plant diversity, conveying information that cannot be preserved on herbarium sheets. Claude Monet’s Jerusalem artichoke presents an impression of Helianthus tuberosus in which he studies how the eye perceives its color and form, whereas Vincent van Gogh’s Sunflowers engages with the tactile and emotive aspects of Helianthus annuus by juxtaposing typical blossoms and double-flower mutants. The pictures not only show us different species, but also model for us a kind of aesthetic and phenomenological attentiveness to the plant world to which we ought to aspire.

### Sun-Shaped though Not Necessarily Golden

Having dispelled several cultural myths about the sunflower, we now turn to another. It is widely believed that sunflowers are heliotropic throughout their lives. In actuality, however, the plant only tracks the movement of the sun during an early phase of its development and, once mature, faces the east. Scientists recently examined the physiological processes that are responsible for these phenomena, publishing their exciting findings in 2016.Their study reveals that the stems of immature plants elongate on opposite sides in a circadian rhythm: the east side elongates to produce heliotropism during the day and the west side does so to reorient eastward at nighttime. This growth pattern results from different genes that are expressed in response to an internal clock or external light, and they also regulate the cessation of movement. These amazing adaptations have ecological advantages, too—whereas heliotropism enhances the growth of the immature sunflower, the fixed eastward position of the blooming sunflower elevates its temperature and contributes to an increase in pollinator visitation. Widespread coverage of those findings by the media no doubt generated new excitement about the plant in recent years.

Heliotropism in plants was observed by the ancient Greeks and this phenomenon is a central conceit in the myth of Clytie and Helios. Explain the myth. The associations of the sunflower in this narrative with notions of WHAT proved influential in Western European art and culture. Introduce idea of constancy and then connect to heliotropism. Interpret print. Anthony Van Dyck’s self-portrait with sunflower; address loyalty to patron and nationalism; discuss value placed on painting from nature; anthropomorphic quality of flowers

### Floral Cyphers: Portrayals of Gender, Sexual Identity, Race, and Class

Aesthetic Movement (Britain); Gender; whiteness

[Figure 14: plate MET; decorative sisters book, 1870s-1880s; constructions of whiteness]

Popularized motif in decoration of designed objects for everyday use. These objects often used in the home, a feminine domain, become associated with gender. Sunflower is forced on Oscar Wilde.

[Figure 15: Oscar Wilde; his attribution of the flower]

Racial caricatures of Oscar Wilde in US disparage him by depicting black persons with emblems associated with him.

[Figure 16: Stereoscopic image MET; blackness; queerness; “folk art” or “outsider art”]

### Social Movements and Symbols of Hope

ADD TEXT

### “Sun, sun, sun, here it comes”

ADD CONCLUSION HERE

### References

_Curtis’s Botanical Magazine_, the botanical periodical featuring colored illustrations of plants that introduced many exotics to British and European horticulturalists and gardeners, published a plate ([#502](https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/469087#page/160/mode/1up)) and a description of _Heliconia psittacorum_ in 1800. The entry explains that this “beautiful stove plant is a native of Jamaica…” and emphasizes the source of the image in a living specimen painted at a specific moment of the plant’s cycle that precedes the most distinctive stage: “At a more advanced stage than that at which our drawing was taken, the top of the stem becomes flexuous or zig-zag,” alluding to the plant’s trademark bracts. The “stove plant” designation is a reminder that growing the first heliconias outside the tropics would have required expensive hothouse infrastructure available only to the wealthy. The flowering of a “stove plant” was often a noteworthy and sometimes competitive feat that brought prestige to the owner. It was also ephemeral, and therefore might be commemorated with the commissioning of a plant portrait. This drawing “was made from a plant which flowered in August 1800, amidst a great variety of beautiful and rare exotics, in the superb collection of E. D. Woodford, Esq., at Vauxhall.” Collectors basked in the glamor that came with coaxing a rare exotic into bloom.

### Finding and Describing a New Heliconia – Art Meets Science

<param ve-image fit="contain" primary url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kristanmhanson/plant-humanities/develop/images/mee_heliconia_uaupensis_RoyalBotanicGardenKew.jpg" title="Margaret Mee, _Heliconia uaupénsis_, © Copyright The Board of Trustees of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew">
The striking beauty of heliconias continued to attract both the plant explorer and the painter well into the twentieth century. In botanical study the interests of art and science have often informed one another; in the case of heliconias, a work of botanical art led to the discovery of a new variety. The renowned botanical painter [Margaret Mee](https://www.doaks.org/resources/online-exhibits/margaret-mee-portraits-of-plants/margaret-mee-in-the-amazon) (1909-1988) undertook 15 expeditions into the Amazon in the course of which she painted several heliconias. One of them, published in Mee’s _Flowers of the Amazon_ _Forests_,  caught the attention of Smithsonian botanist [John Kress](https://www.doaks.org/resources/online-exhibits/margaret-mee-portraits-of-plants/essays-interviews-resources/kress-interview). After spending several years in South America searching for new species of _Heliconia_, in 1990 Kress was back in his office at the Smithsonian, leafing through Mee’s botanical paintings, when he came across a form unknown to him recorded by Mee near the border between Venezuela and Brazil. The flowers’ unusual greenish-yellow color differed from the more typical form of _Heliconia chartacea_, which is bright pink and rose. (The green-yellow variety may be a partial albino form of the typical species which  is called “Sexy Pink” in the horticultural trade.) Kress realized that this was a new variety, and maybe even a new species, and resolved to find it and name it after Mee.
<param ve-entity eid="Q3926643" title="Heliconia chartacea">
<param ve-image fit="cover" title="Photograph of John Kress (center) and team with the newly-found _Heliconia_." url="https://www.doaks.org/resources/online-exhibits/margaret-mee-portraits-of-plants/exhibition-images/14-john-kress-finding-heliconia.jpg/@@images/21b338bf-3b3b-4f38-a159-d728bdf9baea.jpeg">


_Several years later, when I was in Venezuela collecting plants, I decided to find this Heliconia so I organized an expedition up the Orinoco River to where it meets the Vaupés River. With two other botanists (one from Venezuela named Ernesto Foldats and the other a student from Germany) along with my research assistant Cheryl Roesel, I flew down to a missionary group working with the Yanomamo indigenous people where we knew there was a little air strip near Platanal along the Orinoco. Once we landed and paid our respect to our hosts in the region, I headed into the forest along the river. It took me about five minutes to find the new Heliconia! You can tell how excited we were from the photograph. We made some botanical specimens for the local herbarium in Venezuela and the Smithsonian. I took copious notes and measurements. Later I decided that the plant was not a unique species so I named it as a variety and called it Heliconia chartacea var. meena. We flew back that afternoon after a brief celebration. It was a one-day expedition and finding the plant was not that difficult. The return was another story. We had to fly out on a tiny little plane while it was still light. After takeoff I was sitting next to the pilot when the engine stopped while we were high over the rain forest. I thought: “Hey, I have finally found Margaret Mee's Heliconia and the engine has stopped. What is happening?" Then the pilot looked over at me and commented “Oh, I forgot to switch the gas tanks.” He flipped the switch and we continued on our way.”_
<param ve-video title="Heliconia bihai 'Arawak' - (Lobster Claw), Herbarium Werdler" vid="pYiYzb1K450">


<param ve-entity eid="Q21380547" title="Heliconia chartacea var. meeana">
<param ve-storiiies id="ce1ku">
Kress honored Margaret Mee by naming the new discovery _Heliconia chartacea_ var. _meeana_. A pen and ink drawing by the Smithsonian’s scientific illustrator [Alice Tangerini](https://www.doaks.org/resources/online-exhibits/margaret-mee-portraits-of-plants/essays-interviews-resources/tangerini-interview), created after Kress returned with the heliconia, employed a mix of photographs, dried specimens, and dissections under the microscope to capture the plant’s structures for the ensuing botanical publication. The discovery and description of this new variety exemplifies the close entanglement of art and science in the long tradition of plant representation.

Mee’s gift of observation, honed through the painstaking sketching of plants and in conversation with expert botanists, led her to notice the plant. Her painting, though with a primarily aesthetic purpose, was detailed and accurate enough to convince Kress, an expert on the genus, that this was a new discovery. His scientific publication then called for the skill of a botanical illustrator, shifting the emphasis from color and composition to the accurate description of the plant’s parts, yet with a graceful economy of means that produces its own version of aesthetic pleasure.
<param ve-image fit="contain" title="comparison of plant portrait and botanical illustration" url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kristanmhanson/plant-humanities/develop/images/Heliconia_image_comparison.jpg">

### The Natural History of Heliconias – Experts in Interactions

<param ve-entity eid="Q37813" aliases="ecosystems" title="ecosystem">
<param ve-image iiif region="700,1434,900,826" url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kristanmhanson/plant-humanities/develop/images/map_heliconia_pollinators_hummingbird_bat.jpg" title="Distribution of heliconias showing native (green) and introduced (purple) with pollinators.">
Heliconias are not only a source of ornamental and visual pleasure: they are also of particular interest to science and offer an arresting point of departure for our understanding of ecosystems and plant-animal interactions. In fact, the distinctive forms and vivid colors that make heliconias so beautiful also offer a key to their extraordinary evolutionary adaptations. To begin with, heliconias’ respective habitats—which encompass regions as wide apart as tropical South America and the islands of the South Pacific—determine their appearance. Heliconias are mostly found in the neotropics from <span data-click-image-zoomto="132,2,4228,3607">central Mexico down to northern Argentina, including the Caribbean.</span> In tropical America, heliconias are diurnal and brightly colored because they are pollinated by hummingbirds that are attracted to reds, oranges, pinks, and yellows. In exchange for transporting the pollen, hummingbirds gorge on the plentiful sugary nectar of the small flowers protected within the bracts, whose shape ensures that access is restricted to preferred pollinators with suitably evolved bills. Another strange group of heliconias extends from <span data-click-image-zoomto="5770,1534,927,826">Samoa to New Guinea</span> [in the South Pacific](https://www.jstor.org/stable/23188167). Those species are completely different: they are a dull, green color and flower nocturnally because they are pollinated by color-blind bats that forage at night. We now believe that the most ancient heliconias that lived in South America about ten million years ago, and had bright red and yellow flowers, somehow got to the South Pacific islands where they lost their bright colors and switched from hummingbird pollination to bat pollination.

<param ve-image fit="contain" primary url="https://ia802503.us.archive.org/BookReader/BookReaderImages.php?id=variouscontrivan1886darw&itemPath=%2F7%2Fitems%2Fvariouscontrivan1886darw&server=ia802503.us.archive.org&page=n8_w1019" title="Charles Darwin, _The various contrivances by which orchids are fertilised by insects_, title page, New York, Appleton,1886, Harold B. Lee Library">
<param ve-image fit="contain" url="https://ia802503.us.archive.org/BookReader/BookReaderImages.php?id=variouscontrivan1886darw&itemPath=%2F7%2Fitems%2Fvariouscontrivan1886darw&server=ia802503.us.archive.org&page=n52_w356" title="Charles Darwin, _The various contrivances by which orchids are fertilised by insects_, page 31, New York, Appleton,1886, Harold B. Lee Library">
<param ve-entity eid="Q1035" title="Charles Darwin" aliases="Charles Darwin’s">
The highly specialized relationships between heliconias and their pollinators reveal evolution at work. Indeed, these close—sometimes exclusive—relationships between specific plants and animals played a key role in the development of Charles Darwin’s ideas on the process of natural selection and evolution. While Darwin was especially interested in the relationship between orchids and the insects that pollinated them, heliconias offer equally interesting and unique relationships with their animal pollinators. An extraordinary [example](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00442-011-2043-8) of coevolution, or reciprocal evolution between two species, is the relationship between heliconias and hummingbirds in the eastern arc of the Caribbean islands. The two species of heliconias native to these islands and the one species of hummingbird found there have coevolved in a very unique and interesting way. The two heliconias are quite different from each other, but the single species of hummingbird that pollinates them is so specialized that the small-bodied females visit one species of heliconia and the larger-bodied males visit the other species. Astonishingly, the shape and size of the bills of each sex corresponds to the shape and size of the flowers of the specific heliconias that they visit and feed from. In other words, one sex of the hummingbird has evolved with one species of heliconia and the other sex has evolved with the second species of plant.

<param ve-entity eid="Q38095" title="Islas Galápagos" aliases="Galápagos Islands|Galapagos">
<param ve-entity eid="Q43624" aliases="hummingbirds|hummingbird" title="Trochilidae">
<param ve-image iiif fit="contain" url="https://www.doaks.org/resources/online-exhibits/margaret-mee-portraits-of-plants/amazonian-entanglements/heliconia-bihai/@@images/image" title="Bryan Poole, _Heliconia bihai_ with female hummingbirds, 2008, colored etching, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution">
Archipelagos are ideal environments for observing plant evolution driven by interactions with animals of various kinds. Darwin’s ideas on evolution and natural selection were in part based on his experiences and observations in the Galápagos Islands and other archipelagos. The fewer species of plants and animals on islands compared to mainland habitats allow biologists to study more closely ecological and evolutionary processes in natural communities. This is certainly true with the heliconias and hummingbirds in the arc of islands in the Eastern Caribbean. Douglas Altshuler and Christopher James Clark [describe](https://www.jstor.org/stable/3834345) the dynamic nature of these interactions: “Hummingbird and Heliconia engage in a coevolutionary dance, with flower shape evolving in response to hummingbird bills, and bill shape evolving in response to flower shape. By offering nectars containing different amounts of energy, Heliconia species select for different body sizes” in the birds as well. Echoing the famous “Darwin’s Finches” in the Galapagos, Altshuler and Clark referred to the birds in the Caribbean as “Darwin’s Hummingbirds.”

<param ve-entity eid="Q3926650" title="Heliconia tortuosa">
<param ve-entity eid="Q800" title="Costa Rica">
<param ve-image iiif fit="contain" url="https://www.doaks.org/resources/online-exhibits/margaret-mee-portraits-of-plants/amazonian-entanglements/heliconia-caribaea/@@images/image" title="Bryan Poole, _Heliconia caribeae_ with male hummingbirds, 2008, colored etching, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution">
Another species, _Heliconia tortuosa_ from Costa Rica, provides a fascinating example of plant adaption in selecting specific pollinators. The distinctive shape of the plant’s flowers acts as a screening mechanism. An ingenious aviary [experiment](https://www.jstor.org/stable/26462059) has shown that the plant has the capacity to distinguish among pollinators and respond to their visits by preventing or facilitating pollen tube growth to encourage or discourage fertilization and seed production. Specifically, _Heliconia tortuosa_ plants allow pollen tube growth after visits by two species of hummingbird that are more likely to carry high-quality, long-distance and more diverse pollen, and prevent pollen tube growth after visits by less effective species of hummingbirds. The plants apparently discriminate by measuring how much nectar has been removed by the particular birds. This experiment is perhaps the first evidence of specific pollinator recognition by plants, and a form of decision-making that identifies the desired pollinator to optimize reproduction.

### Nature’s Network in Tropical Forests

<param ve-entity eid="Q1602492" title="Heliconia imbricata">
<param ve-entity eid="Q28425" aliases="bats|bat" title="bat">
<param ve-entity eid="Q7367" aliases="mosquitos" title="Culicidae">
<param ve-entity eid="Q43624" aliases="hummingbirds|hummingbird" title="Trochilidae">
<param ve-entity eid="Q1533239" aliases="midges" title="Ceratopogonidae">
<param ve-entity eid="Q859257" aliases="flies" title="fly">
The close relationship between heliconias and their pollinators highlights the vital role these plants play in the broader ecosystem as a source of food and shelter. A number of birds, such as toucans and tanagers, as well as squirrels feed on the bright blue fruits and seeds of most species of _Heliconia_. Some plants, like _Heliconia imbricata_, are keystone species crucial to the survival of many other rainforest inhabitants.  In addition to feeding energy-rich nectar to the hummingbirds which pollinate its flowers, this heliconia offers a daytime home to tent-making bats, who fold-over the banana-like leaves to provide shelter from the tropical sun and rain. The species also serves as the perfect spot for hummingbirds to build their nests under the tips of the leaves. Meanwhile, the liquid that pools in the bracts enclosing the flowers is a breeding ground for insect larvae, especially mosquitos, midges, and flies. One group of tropical beetles, called the rolled-leaf hispine beetles, is highly specialized to feed inside the unfurling leaves of this and other species of heliconias and their relatives.
<param ve-vis-network title="_Heliconia imbricata_ and hummingbird mutualistic interactions" file="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kristanmhanson/plant-humanities/develop/graphs/heliconia birds.tsv">

<param ve-entity eid="Q441" title="botany">
<param ve-entity eid="Q181916" title="herbarium">
Botany has always been a highly visual science, and our understanding of plants depends partly on the ways in which we have chosen to represent them. One of the conventions of both the botanical portrait and the scientific illustration alike is the rendering of the singular plant removed from its natural context and portrayed against a neutral background. Similarly, the herbarium sheet removes the plant from its ecosystem, rendering it suitable for transportation, archiving, and future reference and comparison in museums, but divorcing the specimen from its web of interactions and relationships. We know that plants do not exist in isolation; they inhabit rich and diverse habitats populated by many plants, numerous birds, other animals, and microorganisms. Today, many of the highly specialized interactions among these creatures are severely under threat of extinction. Botanists are therefore using the conventional forms of plant representation, such as herbarium specimens, to understand more about natural habitats of the species and repurposing them to determine effective strategies for their conservation.
<param ve-vis-network file="https://jstor-labs.github.io/plant-humanities/graphs/Heliconia.tsv">

### Conserving the Diversity of Heliconia

<param ve-entity eid="Q17025438" title="United States National Herbarium">
<param ve-map center="0.040297, -71.224280" zoom="3.8" marker-type="circle" stroke-width="0" fill-opacity="1">
<param ve-map-layer geojson active title="Aurea" url="data/heliconia-aurea.tsv" fill="#D11141" radius="6">  
<param ve-map-layer geojson active title="Bihai" url="data/heliconia-bihai.tsv" radius="4.5" fill="#009900"> 
A full assessment of the conservation status of each known species of _Heliconia_ is currently being conducted by John Kress, Gary Krupnick, and Serenity Montaño at the Smithsonian. Using information from specimens collected over the last two hundred years and maintained in herbaria around the world, such as the United States National Herbarium at the Smithsonian Institution, they are using both the [IUCN Red List](https://www.iucnredlist.org/search?query=Heliconia&searchType=species) Criteria method of assessment and a second rapid assessment method to determine the conservation status of each species. Geospatial Conservation Assessment (GeoCat) maps and Red List descriptions of the conservation status of 185 species are being produced. For example, data from over 200 herbarium specimens found in 20 institutions suggest that _[Heliconia bihai](http://www.plantsoftheworldonline.org/taxon/urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:796925-1)_ from the <span data-click-map-flyto="18.005438, -66.612474,5.8">Caribbean</span> and <span data-click-map-flyto="1.069952, -60.720456, 4.6">northern South America</span> is of “Least Concern” for conservation (see GeoCat map and Red List assessment).  Whereas the six available specimens of the very closely related species _[Heliconia aurea](http://www.plantsoftheworldonline.org/taxon/urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:119303-2)_ from <span data-click-map-flyto="9.036443, -69.729927, 7.3">Colombia and Venezuela</span> indicate that it is “Vulnerable” and at risk of extinction most likely due to habitat alteration, degradation, and destruction (see GeoCat map and Red List assessment).


<param ve-plant-specimen eid="Q2727878" max="1">
Our understanding of the diversity and ecology of heliconias has grown tremendously in the last few decades.  Many exciting new forms and species have been discovered and described by botanists. The intricate web of interactions between heliconias and their animal partners in natural ecosystems seems endless with years of observation still needed to fully comprehend their intricacy. Each new plant we find and each additional observation we make opens up entirely new fields for exploration.  Horticulturists, scientists, and citizens have so much more to learn and appreciate about these disciples of Apollo and the Muses from Mount Helicon.

### References

Altshuler, Douglas L. and Christopher James Clark. "Darwin’s Hummingbirds." _Science_ 300 (2003): 588-589. Accessed 1 June 2020. _JSTOR_, [www.jstor.org/stable/3834345](www.jstor.org/stable/3834345).

Betts, M., Hadley, A., and Kress, W. "Pollinator recognition by a keystone tropical plant." _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,_ 112_ no. 11 (2015): 3433-3438. Accessed May 17, 2020. _JSTOR_, [www.jstor.org/stable/26462059](www.jstor.org/stable/26462059).

Kress, W. John. "The Taxonomy of Old World Heliconia (Heliconiaceae)." _Allertonia_, 6 no. 1 (1990): 1–58. Accessed 17 May 2020. _JSTOR_, [www.jstor.org/stable/23188167](www.jstor.org/stable/23188167).

Kress, W. J.  "A synopsis of the genus _Heliconia_ (Heliconiaceae) in Venezuela with one new variety." _BioLlania_, Edición Especial no. 6 (1997): 407-430.

Martén-Rodríguez, S., John Kress, W., Temeles, E. J. _et al._ "Plant–pollinator interactions and floral convergence in two species of _Heliconia_ from the Caribbean Islands." _Oecologia_ 167 (2011): 1075–1083. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00442-011-2043-8

Mee, M., and Morrison, T.  _Margaret Mee, In Search of Flowers of the Amazon Forests: Diaries of an English artist reveal the beauty of the vanishing rainforest_. Suffolk, England: Nonesuch Expeditions, 1988.

Temeles, E. J., and W. J. Kress.  "Evidence for adaptation in a plant-hummingbird association."  _Science_ 300 (2003): 630-633.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE3MTE2NzQzMThdfQ==
-->