The cinnamon challenge
In 2012-2013, the 'cinnamon challenge' was a short-lived internet hype. Although the instruction is simple enough – try to swallow a tablespoon of cinnamon at once – it proves to be virtually impossible in practice. Trying to ingest dry, ground cinnamon bark initially causes a severe choke reaction, characterised by extreme exhalation of cinnamon powder (known as 'dragon breath'). Subsequently, the cinnamon combines with saliva in the mouth to produce an indigestable clutter in the back of the throat. Thankfully, this quite dagerous assignment will only be a marginal footnote in the history of cinnamon. Those who know cinnamon only from an endless series of ridiculous YouTube videos, or as a quotidian kitchen spice, will be surprised to learn that the real challenge of cinnamon has been an ongoing effort for 2000 years, to find out what cinnamon actually is, as a plant and as a medicine.

Forgotten knowledge and fabricated history
Cinnamon had a long history before any European ever saw 'true' cinnamon (Cinnamomum verum J.Presl) growing on Sri Lanka. Here immediately lies the key to understanding the history of cinnamon: most of cinnamon's history is about a plant-based product carrying that name, not about any particular plant species like the one mentioned above. This is a crucial observation, because a lot of confusion about cinnamon emanates from the incorrect equation of names with plants. To be more precise: in the Latin west it has long been assumed that the plants cinnamomum (κιννάμωμον in Greek) and cassia (κασία), as described by ancient medical authorities (notably Dioscorides), are the same as those found in the East Indies in the sixteenth century, to which those names were attached. A recent revision of archaeological, historical, linguistic and botanical evidence, however, has suggested that the cinnamon of ancient history was probably an East-African plant, Cassia abbreviata Oliv., which is not related to the genus Cinnamomum.[^ref1]

How could this confusion last so long? First, a possible explanation for the shift from an East-African to a South-East-Asian plant is linguistic. In medieval Latin, the name for cinnamon from the East Indies was canella, which still resounds in many European languages today. For some reason, the names canella and cinnamomum both began to be associated with the East Indian spice in the Middle Ages.[^ref2] In the wake of the European voyages of discovery in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, European scholars writing about cinnamon would turn to classical, not medieval sources, to understand the spice and its properties. They managed to resolve the discrepancies they found between classical descriptions of the spice and the plant that was found in Sri Lanka. In his book Colloquies on the Simples and Drugs of India (1563), the Portuguese physician Garcia de Orta, who worked in Goa, explained the differences between his own observations and classical authors' descriptions of cinnamon by the fact that the latter had only known the processed spice, not the actual plant.[^ref3]

A second, and much more surprising reason for the long-lasting confusion over cinnamon, is the fact that the exact same issue still exists today. This is a striking case of forgotten knowledge in modern science. In the nineteenth century, Flückiger and Hanbury already noted in their Pharmacographia (1874) that cinnamon in Antiquity did not come from Sri Lanka. It only became a noticeable export item there in the thirteenth century, when political power on the island shifted to the cinnamon-producing areas in the southwest.[^ref4] Rather, they argued, it must have been cassia lignea (a common historical name for cassia, generally believed to be Cinnamomum cassia (L.) J.Presl), imported from China through Arabia and East Africa. Although this narrative is debatable, it is still less imaginative than the one proposed by J. Innes Miller (1969). Miller claimed there had been an interoceanic Spice Route in Antiquity, spanning all corners of the Indian Ocean world. Although this fantastic concept has been rejected by historians, Sri Lanka still features in many accounts of cinnamon in Antiquity.[^ref5]

Cinnamon as a tool of empire
The attraction of cinnamon – 'true' or other – as a means to enhance the power of a state, by displaying its control over exotic riches, predates the early modern period. For example, many coins can be found from the reign of Roman emperor Trajan (reigned 98-117 CE), showing a personification of Arabia, who holds a bundle of cinnamon sticks. The motif can be associated with Trajan's conquests on the eastern border of the empire, which he managed to extend briefly unto the Persian Gulf. Such coins served as propaganda, to emphasize the relation between the authority of the empire and the conquered lands.[^ref7]

The quest for spices, cinnamon among them, was one of the most important aims that inspired Europeans of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries to sail the oceans. With success, as many explorers claimed. Columbus brought samples of cinnamon with him on his first journey to the New World, to help native inhabitants guide him to cinnamon trees. He sent samples of a kind of 'white cinnamon' (probably Canella winterana (L.) Gaertn.) back to Spain from his second journey. Similarly, Juan Sebastián Elcano (1486/1487-1526), who completed Magellan's circumnavigation of the world after the commander himself had been killed on the Philippines, petitioned succesfully to have cinnamon sticks, cloves and nutmeg depicted on his coat of arms, to commemorate his role in opening up the spice route to the East Indies.[^ref6]

Once 'true' cinnamon had begun to be associated only with cinnamon from Sri Lanka, European states strove to gain a foothold on the island, to get access to the cinnamon trade. From the sixteenth century onwards, local rulers bargained with the Portugese, and later the Dutch, for a share in the cinnamon trade, in exchange for political and/or military assistance against their rivals. The Portuguese made humble attempts to create a monopoly after they first arrived on Sri Lanka in 1505. They soon realized that this was impossible without getting involved in local politics on the island. Therefore, the Portuguese engaged in 'reluctant imperialism' to get access to cinnamon: they needed a permanent presence on the island, and eventually signed an agreement with the king of Kotte in 1533 to buy large amounts of cinnamon.[^ref8]

The Dutch made even stronger, concerted efforts to get a hold on cinnamon. They signed a treaty with the king of Kandy in 1638, hoping this would give them a share of the cinnamon trade, which was still dominated by the Portuguese at the time. After the Portuguese were defeated in Colombo in 1656 and Jaffnapatnam in 1658, the Dutch controlled many coastal areas of the island, while the kingdom of Kandy ruled the island's interior. The relation between the Dutch and the king of Kandy was strained. The Dutch intensified the process of cinnamon peeling. Cinnamon trees were scattered throughout the forests of the island, so groups of local peelers often had to cross Portuguese and, later, Kandian territory to reach the areas where the trees grew. As it was impossible for the Dutch to keep a military grip on this enormous territory, or on individual groups of peelers, there was little they could do when peelers chose, or were forced, to switch allegiance. Therefore, bribing the king of Kandy was a recurring means to leave peelers alone, in order not to interrupt the supply of cinnamon.

Peelers were specialized laborers from the Sinhalese caste Salagama (also known as Saliya or Chaliya). Although their skills were indispensable for the cinnamon trade, they were treated harshly by the Dutch. Each year, the peelers gathered in Colombo to pledge loyalty to the Dutch governor (a ceremony called paresse). There was a long peeling season for cinnamon between May and August, and a short one between January and February. On both occassions, groups of men were sent off into the woods with nothing but paring knives and an amount of rice. Each man was obliged to bring back 12 robes (of 56 pounds each) at the end of the summer season. Boys from 12 years of age had to contribute proportionally. Dutch sources often complained about peelers as lazy and unreliable, but the peelers had a hard life. They were away from home for months, had to provide for themselves while working in the forests, where they were subject to diseases, and they were severely punished if they did not meet their quotum.[^ref9]
<param ve-image
	title="test"
	url="NL-HaNA_4.VEL_939A-klein.jpg">

The restrictions of the Dutch on cinnamon production and export made it the only real monopoly on Sri Lanka in the early modern period. Smuggling was severely punished. In 1704, Bengal traders were allowed to export small amounts of cinnamon, which would not affect the monopoly of the Dutch East India Company (VOC) too much. In the 1720s, export restrictions were loosened for several products, but not cinnamon.[^ref10] The tight grip of the Dutch was also felt internally. Cinnamon harvesters had long been accustomed to clearing plots of forest to create a temporary cultivated field (called a chena). Under Dutch rule, they were no longer allowed to practice species circulation on a chena once the plot was planted with cinnamon, so as not to diminish the total acreage. But Pieter van Dam, long-term secretary of the VOC, calculated around 1700 that Sri Lanka produced more than enough cinnamon to supply European and international markets. This makes the suppression of chena practices seem all the more exploitative.[^ref11]

Local grievances about the VOC policy for chenas, combined with extortion of peelers by Sinhalese and Dutch officials, exploded in 1760. Backed by the king of Kandy, the peelers rebelled, leading to a war that lasted until 1766. The war may have caused the Dutch to rethink their approach for cinnamon production. Starting in 1769, governor Iman Willem Falck (in office 1765-1785) began to experiment with 'cinnamon gardens' (kaneeltuinen), which amounted to nothing less than a succesful colonial plantation mechanism. By the end of his governorship, there were 24 million cinnamon trees growing in gardens, which increased to 609 million trees (!) by 1794.[^ref12] The success was short-lived, however. When the British took over control of the Dutch terittories on Sri Lanka in 1796, they failed to maintain the success of the cinnamon plantation economy. Calls for free trade and better working conditions for peelers, high export duties, and competition of cheaper cassia cinnamon from Java finally led to reforms in 1833. But the measures came too late and were counterproductive: Britain sold many plantations to private owners, who switched to coffee and tea production, thus ending the success of cinnamon production for years to come.[^ref13]

Although cinnamon was a succesful monopoly during the Dutch period, was it really a tool of empire? Production and export were guarded as closely as possible, smuggling was prohibited, and living trees could not leave the island. But the Dutch monopoly was about retaining commercial interests above anything else. Otherwise, some exchange of knowledge was possible, and not all restrictions were commercially motivated. When the commander of the Dutch possessions on the Malabar coast, Hendrik Adriaan van Rheede tot Drakenstein, experimented with the oil from local cinnamon species as a medicine, he was reprimanded in 1675 by Rijckloff van Goens, the governor of Sri Lanka, for breaking the monopoly. The colonial government agreed, but Van Rheede justified his actions by letter and continued his work. Here, the motivation of both men was to demonstrate that the medicines from 'their' respective regions were superior. In such instances, interests of empire and personal rivalry intertwined.[^ref14]

Empire was not Alinea over Paul Hermann, herbaria, mislukte plantjes exporteren, misschien Linnaeus? Misschien zelfs Koerner noemen? Hermann (P.) 1687 (failed attempt in Dutch gardens). Paul Hermann / Linnaeus? Andel (T.) & Barth (N.) 2018. Jarvis (C.E.) 2007.

Cinnamon and the imagination of empire
Other states were desperate to have cinnamon for themselves. This was especially true for Spain and its empire. Spain tried – unsuccesfully – to acquire cinnamon trees itself, or at least to copy Dutch practices for exotic plants in its colonies.[^ref15]

Orta - Eigen ervaring van planten die uit de oudheid bekend waren Orta (G.) 1913 (let op: digib ubi dusseldorf heeft een IIIF manifest) Fontes da Costa (P.) 2015 (art Ornelas e Castro) - afbeeldingen in Orta en Clusius (mooi linkjes naar BHL zowel Orta (G.) 1567 als Clusius (C.) 1605) Fontes da Costa (P.) 2015 (art Ornelas e Castro)

Cinnamon in the Spanish (Atlantic) world - Dutch exports of cinnamon to Spain and Spanish world Israel (J.I.) 1989 - Chocolate drink in Spanish Atlantic world Aram (B.) & Yun-Casalilla (B.) 2014 (art Fattacciu) - Spanish efforts to find cinnamon in the New World Batsaki (Y.), Cahalan (S.B.) & Tchikine (A.) 2016 (art Bleichmar over Ortega) Delbourgo (J.) & Dew (N.) 2008a.pdf (art Safier over Pizzarro en Orellana, later Jussieu) Burdick (C.E.) 2014 - Publishing cinnamon knowledge (Hernández expedition) Freedberg (D.) 2002 (zou bruggetje kunnen zijn vanuit Orta) - Cinnamon production of the Philippines Mallari (F.) 1974 Skowronek (R.K.) 2016 Bleichmar (D.) 2012 (pp.123-126) see also http://www.theplantlist.org/tpl1.1/record/kew-2721453, because # Cinnamomum mindanaense is a synonym of Cinnamomum burmanni

Efforts of transplantation and acclimatization - Cinnamon in Rio de Janeiro botanical garden (google die even) Ricardo (L.M.) 2018 Zumbroich (T.J.) 2005

Medicinal uses Ravindran (P.N.), Nirmal Babu (K.) & Shylaja (M.) 2004 (hst 11) Ranasinghe (P.) 2013 Oketch‐Rabah (H.A.), Marles (R.J.) & Brinckmann (J.A.) 2018 (botanical ambiguity in ascertaining medicinal properties)

Modern distribution CABI: https://www.cabi.org/isc/datasheet/13573 Kew, Plants of the World Online http://www.plantsoftheworldonline.org/taxon/urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:463752-1

Kaneelhandel vandaag de dag Ravindran (P.N.), Nirmal Babu (K.) & Shylaja (M.) 2004 (hst 12) http://www.worldstopexports.com/cinnamon-exporters/

Future of cinnamon Ravindran (P.N.), Nirmal Babu (K.) & Shylaja (M.) 2004 (hst 14): lezen! Turner (S.), Monnerat (M.) & Slack (P.) 2019 (uncertain prospects for cinnamon farmers in Vietnam)

In ieder geval toevoegen: #Salagama (Q3469487), also known als saliya or chaliya

Verder vanaf Samaraweera (V.) 19s
References
[^ref1]: Stephen G. Haw, "Cinnamon, Cassia and Ancient Trade", Journal of Ancient History and Archaeology, 4:1 (2017) 5-18.

[^ref2]: Haw, "Cinnamon", 10-11.

[^ref3]: Inês de Ornellas e Castro, "A 'Pleasant Banquet of Words': Therapeutic Virtues and Alimentary Consumption in Garcia de Orta's Colloquies on the Simples and Drugs of India", in: Palmira Fontes da Costa (ed.), Medicine, Trade, and Empire: Garcia de Orta's Colloquies on the Simples and Drugs of India (1563) in Context (Farnham and Burlington: Ashgate 2015) 67-88, there 84, 85.

[^ref4]: Vijaya Samaraweera, "The Cinnamon Trade of Ceylon", Indian Economic & Social History Review, 8:4 (1971) 415-442, there 416.

[^ref5]: J. Innes Miller, The Spice Trade of the Roman Empire, 29 B.C. to A.D. 641 (Oxford: Clarendon Press 1969). The Spice Route thesis was embraced by Lionel Casson, Ancient Trade and Society (Detroit: Wayne State University Press 1984) 225-246; and by John M. Riddle, Dioscorides on Pharmacy and Medicine. Forew. by J. Scarborough (Austin: University of Texas Press 1985) 98-104. It was refuted by Manfred G. Raschke, "New Studies in Roman Commerce with the East", in: H. Temporini (ed.), Aufstieg und Niedergang der Römischen Welt: Geschichte und Kultur Roms in der neueren Forschung, II Principat / Rise and Fall of the Roman World: History and Culture of Rome in Recent Research, 2nd Principat (Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter 1978), vol. 9, part 2, 604-1361; and by Patricia Crone, Meccan Trade and the Rise of Islam (Princeton (NJ): Princeton University Press 1987) 37.

[^ref6]: George B. Griffenhagen, "The Materia Medica of Christopher Columbus", Pharmacy in History, 34:3 (1992) 131-145, there 133; and Francisco Guerra, "Drugs from the Indies and the Political Economy of the Sixteenth Century", in: N. Florkin (ed.), Materia Medica in the XVIth Century: Proceedings of a Symposium of the International Academy of the History of Medicine Held at the University of Basel, 7th Sept. 1964. Analecta Medico-Historica 1 (Oxford: Pergamon Press 1964) 29-54.

[^ref7]: Barbara Zając, "Roman Coinage in the Arabia Region during the Reign of Trajan (98-117 CE)", in: Łukasz Miszk and Maciej Wacławik (eds.), The Land of Fertility II: The Southeast Mediterranean from the Bronze Age (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing 2017) 9-106, there 99-101.

[^ref8]: Zoltán Biedermann, "The Matrioshka Principle and How It Was Overcome: Portuguese and Habsburgs Imperial Attitudes in Sri Lanka and the Responses of the Rulers of Kotte (1506-1598)", Journal of Early Modern History, 13:4 (2009) 265-310.

[^ref9]: Lodewijk Wagenaar, Cinnamon & Elephants: Sri Lanka and The Netherlands from 1600. Transl. by Steve Green and Michael Blass (Amsterdam: Rijksmuseum / Nijmegen: Vantilt Publishers 2016) 149-157.

[^ref10]: S. Arasaratnam, "Dutch Commercial Policy in Ceylon and its Effects on the Indo-Ceylon Trade (1690-1750)", Indian Economic & Social History Review, 4:2 (1967) 109-130.

[^ref11]: Wagenaar, Cinnamon & Elephants, 150, 153.

[^ref12]: Wagenaar, Cinnamon & Elephants, 155.

[^ref13]: Samaraweera, "The Cinnamon Trade of Ceylon".

[^ref14]: Johan Heniger, Hendrik Adriaan van Reede tot Drakenstein (1636-1691) and Hortus Malabaricus: A Contribution to the History of Dutch Colonial Botany (Rotterdam and Boston: A.A. Balkema 1986) 37-38; and Harold J. Cook, Matters of Exchange: Commerce, Medicine, and Science in the Dutch Golden Age (New Haven: Yale University Press 2007) 310-317.

[^ref15]: Daniela Bleichmar, "Botanical Conquistadors: The Promises and Challenges of Imperial Botany in the Hispanic Enlightenment", in: Yota Batsaki, Sarah Burke Cahalan and Anatole Tchikine (eds.), The Botany of Empire in the Long Eighteenth Century (Washington, D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection 2016) 35-60; and Matthew James Crawford, The Andean Wonder Drug: Cinchona Bark and Imperial Science in the Spanish Atlantic 1630-1800 (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press 2016) 76-77.
