<param ve-config
	   title="Venus' Flytrap: Queen of the Carnivorous Plants"
	   source-image="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/48674418" region="236,1695,2055,771"
	   banner="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/48674418" region="236,1695,2055,771"
	   about="John Ellis. Dionaea Muscipula: Or, Venus’s Fly-Trap. (London, 1770)."
	   layout="vtl"
	   author="John R. Schaefer">

### A Household Name
The Venus flytrap, <span eid="Q155825">*Dionaea muscipula*</span>, is easily the most well-known <param ve-entity eid="Q18240"> carnivorous plant. These plants are categorized as such because they attract, trap, kill, and derive nutrients from animal prey, typically in order to supplement the poor mineral nutrition of the soil in which they grow. Today, over 700 species possessing this specialized suite of adaptations have been identified, native to every continent except Antarctica. As the botanist <span eid="Q157501">Joseph Dalton Hooker</span> once proclaimed, “such vegetable sportsmen as the Sundew, the Venus’s Flytrap, and the Pitcher-Plants” have long been of interest to naturalists and the botanically inclined.[^ref1] The prominent figures that he refers to were indeed significant in the history of this topic.
<param ve-image label="L-R: Pitcher plant (Sarracenia purpurea), Venus flytrap (Dionaea muscipula), Sundew (Drosera capensis)" description="Plants with Bite" attribution="John Schaefer" license="CC BY 4.0" region="713,14,3160,2526" url="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/72099600/126547565-256b7442-8d6a-4039-9a7d-da627937f418.JPG">

<span eid="Q1043">Carl Linnaeus</span>, having seen no small number of extraordinary plants in his lifetime, declared the Venus flytrap *miraculum naturae*, or “miracle of nature.” <span eid="Q1035">Charles Darwin</span> even considered it to be among the “most wonderful” plants in the world.[^ref2] The story of this carnivorous curiosity highlights transatlantic networks of correspondence and specimen exchange as critical to the rise of early modern botany, and traces the terrifying delights this tiny plant inspired through centuries of visual, poetic, and empirical mediums. Furthermore, this narrative reveals our tendency to anthropomorphize and gender the “Queen of the Carnivorous Plants,” alongside countless denizens of the plant kingdom.
<param ve-video vid="ee7muQ_qKU0">

### Discovering Carnivory
In 1759, North Carolina governor Arthur Dobbs related news of a “Catch Fly sensitive” plant to his long-time acquaintance <span eid="Q1350818">Peter Collinson</span>.[^ref3] Upon Collinson’s request, the governor provided a more detailed description the following year. In June 1764, Collinson informed <span eid="Q528476">John Bartram</span> of Philadelphia, a fellow <span eid="Q170208">Quaker</span> naturalist, that he sent a dried leaf of the Venus flytrap, or “Tippitiwichet Sensitive,” to Linnaeus, whom he expected to “be in raptures at the sight of” it.[^ref4]
<param ve-entity eid="Q709129">
<param ve-map center="Q659400" zoom="6">
<param ve-map-layer geojson title="The Venus flytrap's native range is limited to a roughly 50-mile radius around Wilmington, NC." url="flytraprange-2.json">

Supposedly named for its <span data-click-image-zoomto="726,6,1867,1468">chaste white flowers</span> -- which rise far above the carnivorous leaves in a delicate bundle -- correspondence between Collinson and Bartram has cast light on the true etymological origins of their “Wagish Tipitiwitched sensitive.” Alluding to the recent marriage of the seventy-three-year-old Dobbs to Justina Davis (1745–1771), fifty-eight years his junior, Collinson wrote to Bartram that “It is now in vain to write to [Dobbs] for seeds or plants of Tipitiwitchet now [that] He has gott one of his own to play with.”[^ref5] This wry comment suggests that “Tipitiwitchet” was no more than a bawdy pun on the resemblance of the Venus flytrap’s alluring red leaves to female genitalia. Yet it is important to note that the androcentric inclinations of early naturalists to sexualize and gender botanical specimens was not limited to *Dionaea* or even other carnivorous plants. Eighteenth-century sexual innuendo often relied on botanical metaphors, and plants sensitive to touch (i.e., *Mimosa pudica*) in particular were considered analogous to male and female sex organs.[^ref6]
<param ve-entity eid="Q148532" title="Mimosa">
<param ve-image label="The Venus flytrap (Dionaea muscipula). Royal Botanic Garden, Sydney." description="Plants with Bite" attribution="John Schaefer" region="-864,127,4320,3454" license="CC BY 4.0" url="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/72099600/126518592-3ecb9dfd-af74-4cc0-8a42-58cb8f01140a.JPG">
<param ve-image label="Grave of Justina Davis Nash, who remarried to Abner Nash, Governor of North Carolina during the Britian occupation of Halifax (1781). Colonial Churchyard, Halifax, North Carolina." description="Ellis illustration of flytrap" attribution="Find a Grave via Richard Parker and Julia M." license="CC BY 4.0" url="https://images.findagrave.com/photos/2015/323/35539715_1448035690.jpg">

These earliest accounts of *Dionaea* demonstrated the plant’s “femme fatale” allure to English naturalists. This fascination was immortalized through the nomenclature proposed by <span eid="Q934747">John Ellis</span> (1710-1776), a British linen merchant and naturalist. *Dionaea muscipula* can be literally translated as “Aphrodite’s Mousetrap,” conjuring up vivid images of a vegetal love goddess’ deadly <span data-click-image-zoomto="1192,1670,925,721">vulva-shaped trap</span> luring small animals to their deaths. The extent to which such vernacular waggery might have influenced Ellis is unclear, but it has certainly helped to secure the Venus flytrap as an organism of enduring popular curiosity.[^ref7]
<param ve-image label="The first publlished illustration of the Venus flytrap by John Roberts embraced it's violent allure. Ellis, 1770." description="Robert's illustration of flytrap" attribution="BHL via Smithsonian Libraries" license="public domain" region="-822,53,4110,3286" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/48674418">

Ellis’ contemporary William Young (1742-1785), tasked by Queen Charlotte with gathering North American botanical specimens, first brought living Venus flytraps to Europe in 1768. He sent some to James Gordon, a well-known nurseryman, and continued to advertise them around England and later France as late as 1783.  Although from correspondence we know William Bartram was likely the first to sketch *Dionaea*, Young produced a crudely colored illustration and labeled it <span data-click-image-zoomto="2068,6432,3500,2798">*Youngsonia*</span> in his unpublished *A Natural History of Plants* (1767).[^ref8]
<param ve-entity eid="Q161159" aliases="Queen Charlotte">
<param ve-entity eid="Q18243" aliases="William Bartram">
<param ve-image label="Earliest surviving illustration of the Venus flytrap. William Young, 1767." attribution="Library and Archives, Natural History Museum London" region="-2468,163,12340,9866" description="Young illustration of flytrap" license="CC BY 4.0" url="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/72099600/126582159-696df410-39c9-4221-b1f7-135deb8dbcbd.jpg">

Nearly a decade after its first description by Dobbs, Linnaeus received word from John Ellis of this mysterious New World plant. On 23 September 1768, Ellis, his longtime correspondent, relayed a detailed account of the Venus flytrap. In his letter, Ellis described “minute sharp red spines, as if design’d by nature to stick into the insect, that is caught, to prevent it, escape by struggling.”[^ref9]  Linnaeus, who confessed that he had “never seen such a wonderful phenomenon,” presented this “most rare and singular plant Dionaea” to the Royal Society of Sciences at Uppsala, relaying to Ellis the Society’s thanks “for the most valuable communication ever received.” Indeed, he considered Ellis’s description so complete that “nothing can be added.”[^ref10] We now understand that Ellis misinterpreted the function of the red spines, which serve as a triggering mechanism for the snap-trap leaves. 
<param ve-video vid="O7eQKSf0LmY">

By 1770, Ellis published an edited version of this letter in his pamphlet *Directions for bringing over seeds and plants, from the East Indies ...*, which included the first published illustration of the Venus flytrap. In a 1768 letter to physician and botanist David Skene (1731-1770), he mentioned that at a meeting of the <span eid="Q123885"> Royal Society</span> a "Lord Moreton" (likely James Douglas, 14th Earl of Morton) had posed a “Shrewd question … Do you think Sr that the plant receives any nourishment from the Insects it catches?”[^ref9] Put on the spot, Ellis had to admit his ignorance in the matter. Yet this idea seemed to appeal to him, and later he described the plant as having a capacity to catch food in its leaves, pointing to the possibility of insects serving as nutriment.
<param ve-entity eid="Q377335">
<param ve-image label="The first publlished illustration of the Venus flytrap by John Roberts embraced it's violent allure. Ellis, 1770." description="Robert's illustration of flytrap" attribution="BHL via Smithsonian Libraries" license="public domain" region="-822,53,4110,3286" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/48674418">

His published description of *Dionaea*, written as an open letter to Linnaeus reads, “The plant, of which I now enclose you an exact figure … shows that Nature may have some views towards its nourishment, in forming the upper joint of its leaf like a machine to catch food.”[^ref12] This description of the flytrap’s deadly trap marks a significant shift in his thinking about the plant as compared to his original letter to Linnaeus, in which he mentions neither nourishment nor the capacity of the plant to kill prey, stating only that “on both lobes near the middle are plac’d 3, sometimes 4, minute sharp red spines, as if design’d by nature to stick into the insect, that is caught, to prevent it, escape by struggling”.[^ref13]
<param ve-d3plus-ring-network 
       url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JSTOR-Labs/plant-humanities/main/John/flytrap-correspondence.tsv"
       center="Dionaea muscipula"
       label="The complex network of knowledge exchange surrounding the Venus flytrap spanned much of Europe and frequently crossed the Atlantic.">
			      
Linnaeus, however, promoted a slightly different narrative within his correspondence network. A November 1768 letter to Dutch botanist Nicolaas Laurens Burman (1734-1793) sums up his opinion on the matter: “The leaves are more sensitive than those of Mimosa, and if an insect or fly crawls or sits on the leaf, it closes its eyes with hairy scales and spines so that the booty cannot slip out and when the prisoner is tired out, the leaf opens and lets it go.”[^ref14]  This notion was later repeated almost verbatim in his *Mantissa Plantarum Altera* (1771), erroneously describing a <span data-click-image-zoomto="474,0,532,426">“catch and release”</span> mechanism of sorts.
<param ve-image label="Carl Linnaeus. Letter 21 November 1768, Uppsala to Nicolaas Laurens Burman, Amsterdam." description="Robert's illustration of flytrap" attribution="Alvin via Uppsala University Library" license="public domain" region="fit" url="https://www.alvin-portal.org/alvin/attachment/download/alvin-record:232622/ATTACHMENT-0003.tiff">

Linnaeus further implored English nurseryman James Gordon for living specimens in 1772, to no avail.[^ref15] He was nonetheless susceptible to the awe *Dionaea* inspired, dubbing it a *miraculum naturae* (miracle of nature) in his *Systema Vegetabilium* (1774). His incredulity regarding the deadly trapping mechanism might simply be attributed to the lack of necessary empirical evidence -- the flattened, inert specimens he received from correspondents failed to communicate the speed and precision of the lethal snap-trap in action. Linnaeus could observe only the compressed leaves of his dried specimens. These understandably inspired the impression of a sleeping eyelid, as Linnaeus described in his letter to Burman. Caption -- [A dried herbarium specimen, similar to the 1807 example shown here, was likely the closest Linnaeus got to this predatory plant.]
<param ve-plant-specimen jpid="10.5555/al.ap.specimen.g00210232">

Following Linnaeus, *Dionaea* also garnered attention from the American naturalist and politician Thomas Jefferson. His first attempt to collect and share specimens of the Venus flytrap in the United States and abroad go as early as January 1786. During Jefferson’s stay in Paris that summer, he requested a shipment of “some seeds of the Dionaea muscipula,” perhaps to impress the Parisians with the wonders of the young nation.[^ref12] After nearly two decades of sporadic attempts to acquire the precious seeds, he was able to obtain some in 1804, towards the close of his first term as President of the United States. Preoccupied by his duties, he finally planted them in April 1809, after the end of his second term. The <span data-click-image-zoomto="2971,4501,2124,1698"> Venus flytrap</span> had officially made its way into the most important garden in the continent. 
<param ve-entity eid="Q11812" title="Thomas Jefferson">
<param ve-image label="American Bog Plants (1806) places two carnivorous plants (Sarracenia and Dionaea) in a romanticized landscape." attribution="BHL via Missouri Botanical Garden, Peter H. Raven Library" description="Thornton, Illustrated plate of Venus' flytrap" license="public domain" region="-1698,-1,8494,6791" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/307056">
<param ve-image label="Thornton's poetic description of Dionaea and Sarracenia." attribution="BHL via Missouri Botanical Garden, Peter H. Raven Library" license="public domain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/307061">

### The Darwins’ ‘most wonderful’ plants
Charles Darwin displayed great enthusiasm for carnivorous plants. As early as 1859, soon after encountering the sundew *Drosera rotundifolia* on an English heath, the author of the <span eid="Q20124">*On the Origin of Species*</span> wrote, "I care more about Drosera than the origin of all the species in the world."[^ref13] By September 1860 he was working with *Dionaea muscipula* as well, and would later dub the Venus flytrap “one of the most wonderful [plants] in the world."[^ref14]  Darwin’s rigorous experimentation with these enigmatic vegetal carnivores culminated in 1875 with the publication of *Insectivorous Plants*. This treatise laid the framework for the study of plant carnivory as it exists today and cemented the notion of carnivorous plants in the scientific and public imagination.
<param ve-image label="Sundew (Drosera rotundifolia) trapping mechanism. Insectivorous Plants (1875)." attribution="BHL via Jisc and Wellcome Library" license="public domain" region="104,774,1437,1149" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/46794102">

Yet Charles Darwin was neither the first nor the only member of his family to delight at the Venus flytrap and its murderous cohort. Indeed, his fascination with these plants developed over three generations of philosophical thought and scientific experimentation that included his grandfather and son. The family’s work with carnivorous plants reveals the enduring botanical legacy of Erasmus, Charles, and <param ve-entity eid="Q1333425"> Francis Darwin.
<param ve-knightlab-timeline source="1gtN_aUHlOPEZr_APokEFgx4cJGoy4wKMha-UavmXiKk&" timenav-position="bottom" hash-bookmark="false" initial-zoom="1" height="680">
<param ve-image label="Dionaea muscipula trapping mechanism. Insectivorous Plants (1875)." attribution="BHL via Jisc and Wellcome Library" license="public domain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/46794379">

The latter half of <span eid="Q234050">Erasmus Darwin’s</span> two-part poem *The Botanic Garden* (1789) sought to display the Linnaean sexual system through poetic analogies of plant sexuality and human affairs, accompanied by Erasmus’ own botanical notes and observations. He carefully weaved the mythological and the physiological discussion through poetic prose and technical footnotes, appealing to a broad audience of general readers and botanical experts alike. His stanza on *Drosera*, seen here, beautifully illustrates the tone of the work as a whole.
<param ve-image label="The Botanic Garden (1791), on Silene and Drosera." description="Drosera1" attribution="BHL via Wellcome Library" license="public domain" fit="contain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/55098708">
<param ve-image label="The Botanic Garden (1791), on Silene and Drosera." description="Drosera2" attribution="BHL via Wellcome Library" license="public domain" fit="contain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/55098709">
<param ve-image label="The Botanic Garden (1791), on Silene and Drosera." description="Silene1" attribution="BHL via Wellcome Library" license="public domain" fit="contain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/55098697">
<param ve-image label="The Botanic Garden (1791), on Silene and Drosera." description="Silene2" attribution="BHL via Wellcome Library" license="public domain" fit="contain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/55098698">

Erasmus considered the “viscous material” of the *Drosera* merely a mechanism to prevent “small insects from infesting the leaves,” “[a]s the ear-wax in animals seems to be in part designed to prevent fleas and other insects from getting into their ears.”[^ref15]  Darwin further relayed in his extensive notes to the reader that “[i]n the Dionaea Muscipula there is a still more wonderful contrivance to prevent the depredations of insects: [...] so irritable, that when an insect creeps upon them, they fold up, and crush or pierce it to death.” He had witnessed this “irritable” behavior of *Dionaea* firsthand in 1788 at Ashburn Hall, Derbyshire, subsequently receiving a colored illustration of the flytrap from <param ve-entity eid="Q18936200"> Maria Elizabetha Jacson. Jacson would later bring attention to plant carnivory in her *Sketches of the Physiology of Vegetable Life* (1811). Most illustrations of the Venus flytrap - including Erasmus Darwin's - were simply reproductions of Ellis' original plate, as seen here.
<param ve-compare curtain url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/48674418" label="Ellis" attribution="BHL" license="No Known Copyright">
<param ve-compare url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/55098696" label="Botanic Garden" attribution="BHL" license="No Known Copyright">

Erasmus Darwin’s conviction that these mechanisms — “curious contrivance[s]” to “prevent various insects from plundering the honey, or devouring the seed” — were a defense against insects is perplexing, placing so much emphasis on the damage a tiny fly could inflict on these plants.  Was he perhaps allowing poetic metaphors to guide his understanding of biological phenomena? While painting a vivid picture of “The fell SILENE and her sisters fair,” who “[s]kill’d in destruction, spread the viscous snare,” he was inclined to present his anthropomorphized botanical actors as righteous wardens rather than scheming hunters.
<param ve-image label="F.P. Nodder's engraving in George Shaw's The Naturalist's Miscelanny (1790) was adapted for the 1791 edition of Erasmus Darwin's The Botanic Garden." attribution="BHL via Museums Victoria" license="public domain" region="-496,324,2480,1983" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/59263121">

Carnivorous plants continued to assert themselves in poetry and philosophical thought at the turn of the century. Some authors expressed incredulity and wonder at carnivory as such, as did the Irish poet Thomas Moore (1779-1852) in *Epistles, Odes, and Other Poems* (1806): “The Lord deliver us, Think of a vegetable being ‘carnivorous!’”  Moore’s verse parallels William Bartram’s lively 1792 description, “But admirable are the properties of the extraordinary Dionaea muscipula! [...] <span data-click-image-zoomto="1,1022,667,519">carnivorous vegetable!</span>”[^ref16]
<param ve-image label="American Lotus or Water Chinquapin, Venus Flytrap, and Great Blue Heron. William Bartram ca. 1774-80" attribution="The Trustees of the British Museum" description="Bartram illustration of flytrap" region="-399,-18,2000,1599" license="public domain" url="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/72099600/126584419-b37ddd94-30a3-47de-867f-65597e32478a.jpg">

It was not until 1860, when another Darwin, Charles, began pondering the lethal activities of sundews to make sense of the Venus flytrap. Over the course of the next decade, he sporadically worked with the <param ve-entity eid="Q156185"> Droseraceae. Among those who facilitated his study of these plants were the American naturalist <span eid="Q6780853">Mary Treat</span> and Sir Joseph Dalton Hooker, Darwin’s close friend and director of <param ve-entity eid="Q188617"> Kew Gardens, who supplied him with living specimens. Armed with this network of correspondents and the global resources of Kew, Darwin was able to carry out the investigations of carnivory from his backyard greenhouse at <param ve-entity eid="Q3038318"> Down House.
<param ve-iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/316587632?h=8d73406d18" title="Song composed by Francis Neary of the Darwin Correspondence Project, using quotes Darwin's own letters.">

In the early 1870s Darwin’s passion for these plants reached a fever pitch. While focusing mainly on *Drosera*, he simultaneously studied carnivory in *Dionaea, Utricularia, Pinguicula,* and *Aldrovanda*. Meanwhile, Hooker occupied himself with the pitcher plants *Nepenthes, Sarracenia,* and *Cephalotus* at Kew. Inspired by a visit to Darwin’s home, <span eid="Q28836">John Burdon-Sanderson</span>, one of the most prominent physiologists of the nineteenth century, was also compelled to investigate the mysterious behavior of the <span data-click-image-zoomto="238,3,1001,801">Venus flytrap</span>.
<param ve-entity eid="Q161195">
<param ve-entity eid="Q161663">
<param ve-entity eid="Q19668">
<param ve-entity eid="Q217530">
<param ve-entity eid="Q161174">
<param ve-entity eid="Q2181577">
<param ve-image label="Curiosities of Natural History. Heath, 1809." description="Dodo, flytrap and elephant" attribution="Wikimedia Commons via Wellcome Collection" license="public domain" region="-439,8,2348,1877" url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b1/Above%2C_a_dodo%2C_a_venus_flytrap%2C_two_plants%2C_a_shell%2C_a_flyin_Wellcome_V0020667EL.jpg">

Burdon-Sanderson’s experiments showed that *Dionaea*’s leaves closed only when unsuspecting prey disturbed the electric current running through the plant, just as animal muscles contract in response to stimulus. Darwin further elucidated the nature of this ingenious trapping mechanism. He realized that the plant had “learned” to determine the prey that was worth capturing. Of the three trigger hairs on each lobe of the leaf, two had to be touched within 20 seconds of each other to trigger the trap. Continuous stimulation would cause the trap to seal shut and begin digesting its prey, while smaller insects could simply slip out and the trap would reset. Part of Darwin’s enduring impact on biology was his work that examined such evolutionary adaptation through various botanical lenses, with the Venus flytrap and other carnivorous plants serving as a prime example.
<param ve-graphic img="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9d/Dionaea_muscipula_closing_trap_animation.gif" label="D. muscipula trapping mechanism" attribution="Wikimedia Commons" title="Triggering a Venus flytrap.">

Darwin’s son, Francis, carried on his father’s legacy in a variety of ways, including his own research of plant carnivory. Francis’s passion for carnivorous plants first stemmed from aiding his father in his work on *Insectivorous Plants*, in which he is credited with illustrating the tiny underwater traps of *Aldrovanda* and *Utricularia. Drosera*, however, was the resounding favorite of both father and son. Nearly two-thirds of *Insectivorous Plants* was dedicated to the sundew. Being privy to his father's experiments, Francis sought to develop the book’s findings after the first edition was published.
<param ve-image label="Utricularia trapping mechanism. Insectivorous Plants (1875)." attribution="BHL via Jisc and Wellcome Library" license="public domain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/46794490">
<param ve-image label="Aldrovanda trapping mechanism. Insectivorous Plants (1875)." attribution="BHL via Jisc and Wellcome Library" license="public domain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/46794415">

Detractors of Charles Darwin’s carnivorous theory frequently pointed out that so-called carnivorous plants flourished in European hothouses year-round without any insect prey to feed on. Experiments that Darwin carried out while writing Insectivorous Plants sought to address this quandary but failed, as all the plants — fed or not — had died. Francis returned to the subject of his father’s beloved *Drosera rotundifolia* in 1877, finding out that the sundews that had been ‘fed’ doubled in seed production and size.[^ref17] Since these early experiments, many carnivorous genera have been proven to demonstrate increased size and biomass when the plants had access to insect prey. After his father’s death, Francis went on to publish a revised second edition of *Insectivorous Plants* in 1888, incorporating new discoveries to enhance the scientific understanding of plant carnivory.
<param ve-image label="Draughtsman Sydeham Edwards of the popular Curtis's Botanical Magazine was the first to note that the trapping mechanism was selective. 1804." attribution="BHL via Missouri Botanical Garden, Peter H. Raven Library" license="public domain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/471202">
<param ve-image label="Draughtsman Sydeham Edwards of the popular Curtis's Botanical Magazine was the first to note that the trapping mechanism was selective." attribution="BHL via Missouri Botanical Garden, Peter H. Raven Library" license="public domain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/471203">

### ‘Vegetable Wickedness’ on Display
The idea that a plant could eat meat has not been without controversy. French botanist Auguste Trécul (1818-1896) denounced the carnivorous character of *Drosera* in 1855, and as late as 1867 his colleague Pierre Duchartre (1811-1894) likewise declared the notion of carnivory unworthy of serious consideration. However, by 1875, the mountain of experimental evidence presented by Charles Darwin, alongside the work of Joseph Hooker, John Burdon-Sanderson, Mary Treat and others, finally convinced the scientific community that plants could indeed <span data-click-image-zoomto="1971,916,1419,1135">attract</span>, <span data-click-image-zoomto="2099,2439,1000,779">capture</span>, and digest <span data-click-image-zoomto="3378,1086,1140,911">animal prey</span>.
<param ve-image label="This dramatized incarnation of D. muscipula features a tangle of flowers, ignored by potential pollinators as they throw themselves into its maws. T. Green, The universal herbal (1817)." description="Dracontium pertusum and Dionaea muscipula" attribution="Artstor via Wellcome Collection" license="CC BY 4.0" fit="cover" url="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/72099600/126911356-3efc8a75-c783-47d8-a97e-c8f7fb61ce6b.jpg">
<param ve-image label="An unusually chaste illustration of Dionaea, compared to lionized contemporary images. Ventenat, É. P. and Pierre Joseph Redouté. Jardin de La Malmaison (1803)." attribution="BHL via Smithsonian Libraries" description="illustration of flytrap" license="public domain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/43441942">

From that point on, carnivorous plants were less often portrayed as solitary botanical curiosities, but were instead grouped together in dynamic visual menageries. The relationship between the vegetal predator and its insect prey was increasingly the focal point of such illustrations. Rather than serving as simply a feature of its native environment, the <span data-click-image-zoomto="1,2471,1612,1255">Venus flytrap</span> became associated with the nutrient-poor soils that were thought to prompt its alternative feeding habits. Botanical illustrators increasingly sought to display carnivory as a product of its harsh environment as ecology and evolutionary theory became ever more entwined.
<param ve-image label="Presenting carnivorous plants as a coherent group became commonplace after Darwin's Insectivorous Plants (1875). E. Schmidt, Pflanzen als Insectenfänger (Insectivorous Plants), from Die Gartenlaube (1875)." attribution="Wikimedia Commons" fit="contain" license="public domain" url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Die_Gartenlaube_%281875%29_b_160.jpg">
<param ve-image label="The German botanist and illustrator Otto Schmeil was among those who emphasized the relationship between the plant’s physiology and ecology in his work. Lehrbuch der Botanik (1911)" attribution="Wikimedia Commons" fit="contain" license="public domain" url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c9/Lehrbuch_der_Botanik_%28Taf._8%29_%288071691582%29.jpg">

Parallel to this shift in scientific illustration, an explosion of periodical literature featuring plant carnivory catapulted the Venus flytrap and its fellow vegetal carnivores into the public imagination. As Quaker author J.G. Hunt wrote of the sundew in “Natural History Studies” (1882), “Surely here, if anywhere, is vegetable wickedness.” Fictional accounts of man-eating plants regularly featured in Anglo-American periodical literature at the end of the nineteenth century, perpetuating far-fetched stories from fictional explorers encountering the “Man-Eating Tree” of Madagascar or the “Vampire Vine” of Namibia.[^ref18]
<param ve-image label="The South American Ya-te-veo tree, a man-eating plant depicted alongside the Venus flytrap in J.W. Buel's Land and Sea, 1887." attribution="Wikimedia Commons" license="public domain" url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/60/The_ya-te-veo.jpg">
<param ve-image rotate="90" label="Man-eating plants became a popular feature of Anglo-American science-fiction and horror genres." attribution="BHL via University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign" license="public domain" url="https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/4259330">

Arthur Conan Doyle, the author of Sherlock Holmes, helped jumpstart this craze in 1880 with "The American's Tale." First published anonymously in the Christmas special of the London Society magazine, this short story centered around a man killed by a massive Venus flytrap in the Arizona wilderness. The legendary science fiction writer H.G. Wells also wrote of a botanist's blood-sucking orchid in 1905, laying the foundations for alien man-eating plants featured in musical, film, and television adaptations of *Little Shop of Horrors* and *Day of the Triffids* popular in the twentieth century.
<param ve-entity eid="Q35610">
<param ve-entity eid="Q4653">
<param ve-entity eid="Q42511">
<param ve-entity eid="Q1199259">
<param ve-entity eid="Q886190">
<param ve-graphic img="https://media.giphy.com/media/pBj0EoGSYjGms/giphy.gif" title="The man-eating Audrey II, modeled after the Venus flytrap (Feed me, Seymour!). Little Shop of Horrors (1986)." attribution="Giphy">

As the Venus flytrap made this leap from Darwin's scientific publication to popular periodicals, it was also taken on as a protagonist of new media of educational and artistic display. The Blaschka Glass Flowers, commissioned in 1886 by Professor George Lincoln Goodale, the first director of Harvard’s Botanical Museum, included perhaps the first life-sized model of *Dionaea muscipula* for teaching, complete with a <span data-click-image-zoomto="1039,4089,702,547">tiny glass fly</span> frozen on the precipice of doom.
<param ve-entity eid="Q835748" aliases="Blaschka Glass Flowers">
<param ve-image label="Glass model of Dionaea muscipula by Leopold and Rudolf Blaschka, 1890." attribution="The Archives of Rudolf and Leopold Blaschka and the Ware Collection of Blaschka Glass Models of Plants, Harvard University Herbaria © President and Fellows of Harvard College" description="Blaschka glass flowers" fit="contain" url="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/72099600/129391009-dccda6c5-e82d-4954-98b0-a124b7b3e80a.jpg">

As countless stunning cultivars are grown commercially to feed the global plant trade, wild populations of *Dionaea muscipula* have become increasingly threatened by habitat destruction, poaching, pollution, and anthropogenic climate change. Nearly half of all carnivorous plants fall under <param ve-entity eid="Q48268"> International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) risk categories, ranging from near threatened to critically endangered. Despite wild populations having been established in the United States and Caribbean, *Dionaea* is currently listed as “vulnerable,” with hefty fines and jail time threatening potential poachers.
<param ve-map center="Q1558" zoom="4">
<param ve-map-layer geojson title="Wild populations of the Venus flytrap have been established accross the United States and Carribean, and are grown commercially worldwide." url="introducedrange.json">

Yet, today, the Venus flytrap remains on display in the living collections of almost every major botanic garden in the world. Frequently appearing in special exhibitions and displays, it continues to draw the fascination of millions of visitors each year. The Venus flytrap has assumed many unorthodox roles in human affairs, becoming - sometimes simultaneously - a bawdy pun, poetic curiosity, threat to scientific order, wonder of natural selection, teaching tool, and an inspiration for exotic myths and monstrosities. The summer of 2021 even witnessed the release of an empowering ballad by pop artist MARINA that subverts the plant's bawdy origins and pays homage to the creature features it inspired throughout the twentieth century. As countless individuals have struggled to find a place for this curious little plant within their respective social and scientific contexts, *Dionaea muscipula* has become firmly established as an organism of beguiling and at times disconcerting cultural significance.
<param ve-image label="Plants With Bite exhibit at the Royal Botanic Garden, Sydney (2020)." attribution="John Schaefer" license="CC BY 4.0" url="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/72099600/129497753-b801c2c5-fd65-4abc-a80b-9c2a9a11245d.JPG">
<param ve-image label="Savage Garden display at the US National Garden (2008)." attribution="Wikimedia Commons" license="public domain" url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/44/Savage_Gardens_Exhibit_at_the_U.S._Botanic_Garden_venus_flytrap_sculpture.JPG">
<param ve-video vid="F1JTlnHGa90">

### References

[^ref1]: Joseph Dalton Hooker. Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. Vol. 44. London, 1875. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/94451.
[^ref2]: Charles Darwin. Insectivorous Plants. London: J. Murray, 1875. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/178952.
[^ref3]: E. Charles Nelson. Aphrodite’s Mousetrap: A Biography of Venus’s Flytrap with Facsimiles of an Original Pamphlet and the Manuscripts of John Ellis. Aberystwyth, Wales: Published by Boethius Press in association with Bentham-Moxon Trust and the Linnean Society, 1990. 26-7.
[^ref4]: E. Charles Nelson. Aphrodite’s Mousetrap. 22.
[^ref5]: P. Collison to J. Bartram. 30 June 1764. Bartram Papers BP 3:8: ms in Historical Society of Pennsylvania, quoted in E. Charles Nelson, Aphrodite’s Mousetrap.
[^ref6]: Judith Magee. The Art and Science of William Bartram. University Park, Pa.:, 2007. http://hdl.handle.net/2027/umn.31951d02769100d.
[^ref7]: John Ellis. “Letter 23 September 1768, London to Carl Linnaeus.” Accessed November 29, 2020. http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:alvin:portal:record-232608.
[^ref8]: Carl Linnaeus. “Letter 16 October 1768, Uppsala to John Ellis, London.” Accessed November 25, 2020. http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:alvin:portal:record-232596.
[^ref9]: E. Charles Nelson. Aphrodite’s Mousetrap. 37. 
[^ref10]: John Ellis. Directions for Bringing over Seeds and Plants, from the East-Indies and Other Distant Countries, in a State of Vegetation: Together with a Catalogue of Such Foreign Plants. To Which Is Added, the Figure and Botanical Description of a New Sensitive Plant, Called Dionaea Muscipula: Or, Venus’s Fly-Trap. London: Printed and sold by L. Davis, 1770. 37.
[^ref11]: Carl Linnaeus. “Letter 21 November 1768, Uppsala to Nicolaas Laurens Burman, Amsterdam.” Accessed April 25, 2021. http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:alvin:portal:record-232622.
[^ref12]: Thomas Jefferson. “Dionaea Muscipula - Venus Flytrap | Thomas Jefferson’s Monticello.” Accessed April 5, 2021. https://www.monticello.org/site/research-and-collections/dionaea-muscipula-venus-flytrap#footnote2_d6l1jms.
[^ref13]: Charles Darwin. Darwin Correspondence Project, “Letter no. 2996,” accessed on 2 August 2021, https://www.darwinproject.ac.uk/letter/DCP-LETT-2996.xml 
[^ref14]: Charles Darwin. Insectivorous Plants. 286. 
[^ref15]: Erasmus Darwin. The Botanic Garden: A Poem, in Two Parts ... : With Philosophical Notes. J. Johnson, 1795. II.1:231-42. 
[^ref16]: William Bartram. Travels through North and South Carolina, Georgia, East and West Florida, the Cherokee Country, the Extensive Territories of the Muscogulges or Creek Confederacy, and the Country of the Chactaws : Containing an Account of the Soil and Natural Productions of Those Regions : Together with Observations on the Manners of the Indians : Embellished with Copper-Plates. Philadelphia : Printed by James and Johnson, 1791.xiii—xiv. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/191332. 
[^ref17]: Francis Darwin. 1878. Experiments on the Nutrition of Drosera rotundifolia. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 17(98): 17–31.
[^ref18]: Sophia Prior. Carnivorous Plants and “the Man Eating Tree.” Chicago: Field Museum of Natural History, 1939. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/25206.
